The Ford Struandale engine plant, in Port Elizabeth, has started production of the new-generation diesel engines that are set to power the Ford Ranger Raptor and selected Ranger and Everest models that will be launched in the first half of 2019. The Port Elizabeth facility opened its doors in 1964 and has produced more than 3.4-million engines to date. “With the launch of the new diesel engines, the Struandale engine plant embarks on a historic new journey, as it almost doubles our combined installed capacity to 250 000 units [a year] for our two engine programmes,” says plant manager John Cameron. As part of Ford’s 2017 investment of more than R3-billion in its South African operations, the plant’s newest assembly line has an installed capacity to produce up to 120 000 engines a year. The new engine programme starts off with low-volume production for the remainder of 2018, ramping up from early 2019. The new assembly line will produce a total of eight derivatives of the new engines, including the 157 kW/500 Nm Bi-Turbo unit. All of the engines will be supplied to Ford’s Silverton assembly plant, in Pretoria, for installation in selected new Ranger and Everest models and the new Ranger Raptor. Ford’s local vehicle production supports domestic sales, as well as 148 export markets around the world. The new engine assembly line incorporates a cylinder head sub-assembly line that uses four fully automated robots for the precise fitment of components, as well as high-pressure leak testing. There are four more robotic stations on the main assembly line that apply the special room-temperature vulcanising silicone gaskets, with each operation monitored by integrated camera inspection systems. Each of the 110 assembly stations along the 312 m line incorporates error-proofing and traceability, and every engine is subjected to a cold test at the end of the assembly line to verify operating parameters and pressures of all systems, without physically starting the engine. This is backed up by a hot test cell to test engine parameters when running, as well as a dynamometer that conducts a range of performance and durability tests on selected engines at predetermined intervals. Continuing alongside the new engine programme, the existing Duratorq TDCi engine programme has seen yearly installed capacity increase from 75 000 units in 2011, to a maximum capacity of up to 130 000 units from the end of 2018. This engine platform will continue to be offered in the range of vehicles produced at the Silverton plant, as well as in vehicles exported to global customers. In addition, the Struandale plant’s machining capacity for the Duratorq TDCi programme has increased from the original 220 000 component sets (cylinder head, block and crankshaft), to a peak of up to 280 000 sets, in answer to growing demand.