South Africa’s revamped automotive industry framework places local content at the centre of any future support for the industry, with government having set a target of raising local content from less than 40% currently to 60% by 2035. The local-content target is outlined in the newly released South African Automotive Masterplan, adopted by Cabinet on November 22, which aims to double employment in the sector to 240 000 jobs by 2035 and position South Africa to produce 1% of global vehicle production by that date. It has also been integrated into amendments to the Automotive Production and Development Programme (APDP), which will provide the incentive framework for the industry for the period from 2021 to 2035. The current APDP incentive programme expires at the end of 2020. The amended APDP shifts support away from production sales value towards value addition through the introduction of a volume assembly localisation allowance, or Vala, which will replace the current volume assembly allowance. However, the Vala formula will be phased in between 2021 and 2026 to ensure no disruption to existing original-equipment manufacturer (OEM) model investments. By 2026, the Vala is set at 35% of local value-add for OEM volumes above 10 000 units, but in 2021 it is set at 40%. Outlining the changes at a briefing, in Pretoria, on Friday, Trade and Industry Minister Dr Rob Davies said the adjustment to the formula would align government’s support for the industry directly with a vehicle’s local content, by removing credit for all imported content. Flanked by officials from the Department of Trade and Industry, as well as representatives from the automotive sector, the component sector and labour, Davies described the 60% target as ambitious. However, he said it was the outcome of a robust collaborative engagement with the industry since 2016, which sought to ensure that government's ongoing support for the industry helped facilitate greater industrialisation in the sector. It also sought to rebalance the flow benefits from government’s automotive incentives, which currently favoured the OEMs and vehicle importers, towards component manufacturers. Besides the adjustment to the vehicle assembly formula, the new-look APDP also increases the production incentive benefit to 25% on components. Critically, the contentious production rebate credit certificates (PRCCs) will be replaced by duty credits that are tied to local value addition. This is expected to help mop up the current surplus of PRCCs, which are used by OEMs and importers to bring new vehicles into South Africa duty-free. The Automotive Investment Scheme (AIS) cash grant for capital investments has been retained, but will be reduced by 5% in those instances where non-South African tooling and machinery is employed. Davies also announced that the AIS would be augmented to include an incentive for investments in new technologies, including investments related to the introduction of electric or hybrid drive trains. However, details would be shared only once the National Treasury had approved the incentive. The Minister also announced no changes were envisaged to the tariff regime in respect of vehicles, but South Africa would be pursuing negotiations with the European Union in a bid to address anomalies that exist in the Economic Partnership Agreement with regard to the treatment of vehicles with engines below 1 000 cc, as well as electric vehicles. The APDP amendments also cover medium and heavy commercial vehicles, as well as motorcycles, but the Vala formula would not be applied in either category. National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa president Andrew Kirby, meanwhile acknowledged that the new targets would be prove challenging to meet, but welcomed the certainty provided by both the masterplan and the amended APDP. Kirby, who also leads Toyota South Africa Motors, said it was up to the OEMs to work with its suppliers to both adapt to the lower levels of future support, as well as the demand for higher levels of local content. He said particular attention would be given to the development of tier two and three suppliers, where the greatest potential existed for the creation of black industrialists. National Association of Automotive Component and Allied Manufacturers VP Ken Manners described the amendments to the APDP as “extremely exciting” for the local component industry and a logical “architectural progression” in government’s support for the sector. He said the amendments recognised the benefits of having a deep and diverse supply chain, which should prove to be in the long-term interest of South Africa as a manufacturer of automotive products. National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa general-secretary Irvin Jim also welcomed the changes, which he said signified a commitment to the reindustrialisation of the South African economy.