President Cyril Ramaphosa will on December 6 officiate the opening of the Atlantis Special Economic Zone (SEZ), in the Western Cape. The launch of the 124.5 ha zone is designated for the establishment of a green technologies hub for the province. Trade and Industry Minister Dr Rob Davies elaborated in a statement that the SEZ will manufacture green technologies, alternative waste management, and energy efficiency technology, alternative building material and other clean technologies. “A combined R1.8-billion is expected to be invested in the SEZ by 2022. A total of 24 000 full-time equivalent jobs are also expected to be created over the SEZ’s 20-year lifespan,” he said. Davies added that, in 2011, the Western Cape provincial government, in partnership with the City of Cape Town, had established a manufacturing hub for green technologies in Atlantis, which attracted large investors even before the designation was official. “Four of these investors are already operational with more expected to take occupancy within the SEZ in future once the facility is fully operational. This development will also allow the people of Atlantis to become involved in economic opportunities right on their doorsteps, and play an integral part in growing their economy. Western Cape Premier Helen Zille noted that the Western Cape green economy strategic framework serves as the province’s roadmap to becoming the leading green economic hub on the African continent, and the SEZ’s official launch is yet another step forward in this regard. “We have identified the green economy, together with agroprocessing and tourism, as key sectors under the Western Cape’s economic strategy, Project Khulisa. It focusses on sectors that prioritise jobs for young people, has a significant jobs impact in rural areas and opportunities for people with entry-level skills,” she pointed out. Zille added that, as a green investment destination, the Western Cape offers an emerging national renewable energy and cleantech hub; a range of investment incentives in Atlantis Greentech SEZ; as well as major opportunities for investors in, energy services, utility scale solar and wind, waste, water, bioeconomy and resource efficiency.