JSE-listed Attacq, in collaboration with JV partner Tricolt, is recording high sales volumes on Phase 1 of Ellipse Waterfall, the first high-rise residential development within Waterfall City, with sales totalling R420-million in the first week. The new residential development was announced in early October. It will be situated in the heart of Gauteng’s newest business node, and notably, has sold over 65% of the available units in a little over a week. “This achievement speaks to Ellipse Waterfall’s unique value proposition. Its strategic location, pristine surroundings and world-class amenities, make Ellipse Waterfall a no brainer for discerning investors,” Tricolt CEO Tim Kloeck said in a statement on Thursday. The development comprises four towers – Newton, Kepler, Da Vinci and Galileo – totalling 590 apartments. Phase 1 comprises two of the four towers set to be completed by 2021. Based on current progress, construction for Phase 1 of Ellipse is estimated to start in early 2019. “Unlike other mixed-used developments that are fast running out of space or building on top of decaying infrastructure, Waterfall City is essentially brand new. Its buildings, roads and infrastructure are built to the highest quality and its strategic location at the crossroad of the province’s major transport routes makes investing here a smart long-term decision,” said Attacq development head Giles Pendleton. Prospective buyers are able to select from executive one-bedroom apartments, starting from 45 m², to flagship three-bedroom duplex penthouses that offer up to 327 m² of living space, including private rooftop gardens and heated pools. Attacq CEO Melt Hamman believes demand for apartment living in Waterfall will be supported by the ongoing commercial expansion of the node. “With various blue-chip firms, such as PwC, Accenture and Deloitte, taking up residency within Waterfall City, there is a growing need for us to expand our residential offering. Ellipse Waterfall is the first step towards meeting that demand,” concludes Hamman.