From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Allied Steelrode earlier this month launched its second stretcher leveller, a machine which helps to eliminate the stresses in steel, amid a somewhat lacklustre local business environment. Simone Liedtke, who attended the launch, tells us a bit more. Simone Liedtke: The stretcher leveller, which weighs about 250 t and has a length of 120 m, is capable of processing material up to 12 mm thick, 2 m wide and up to 15 m in length, which is fed from coils that can weigh up to 33 t. Allowing for greater operational efficiencies, which results in shorter lead times to delivery, was part of the rationale behind the purchasing of the second stretcher leveller, according to Allied Steelrode executive director Warne Rippon. Allied Steelrode executive director Warne Rippon: Simone Liedtke: Despite the supply chain of downstream steel in the manufacturing industry needing more protection, Rippon remains hopeful for change. This is supported by his “quietly positive” outlook moving forward, where he believes the industry will see progress next year after experiencing a slump in the industry. Allied Steelrode executive director Warne Rippon: Simone Liedtke: This sentiment is supported by Allied Steelrode group chief executive Arun Chadha, who explained that even though South Africa is currently in a recession, the steel industry has been suffering for many years. Allied Steelrode group chief executive Arun Chadha: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines – South African, French companies collaborate on sustainable cities The French-South African Sustainable City conference was recently held in Johannesburg, organised by Business France, which supports and facilitates the development and success of French and foreign businesses that want to expand abroad. Business France trade development adviser Stefane Leny: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.