From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Luxury aviation company ExecuJet last month officially launched and welcomed the Pilatus PC-24 to its fleet at the company’s private terminal at Cape Town International Airport. Simone Liedtke reports. Simone Liedtke: Developed by Swiss original-equipment manufacturer Pilatus, the PC-24 aircraft is the first of its type delivered to South Africa, and on the African continent. The aircraft does not fit into any of the existing business jet categories, but rather fits into a category of its own – the super versatile jet category. The PC-24 has been engineered to be “off-road” compatible from the beginning, with “outstanding” short-field performance, even on unpaved runways. This, according to business aviation company ExecuJet, affords the plane an “incredible level of mobility”, and cements the company’s reputation for having a modern and capable charter fleet. The aircraft delivers the latest in in-flight comfort and technology for passengers, and combines the versatility of a turboprop with the cabin size of a medium-light jet, and the performance of a light jet. The PC-24’s interior has combined comfort and functionality, with each component having been carefully chosen to enhance the passenger experience. Components include soft leathers and hardwood cabinetry, which create a bespoke interior that reflects a meticulous design. The generously-sized cabin boasts a continuous flat floor, and allows for exceptional headroom for both passengers and crew. Considering that production of the aircraft only began last year, the initial order book for the PC-24 was sold out within a matter of days after being launched. The fourteenth aircraft will be delivered to the client soon. The first customer delivery of the PC-24 took place in February. ExecuJet will engage with various owners of the PC-24 to place the aircraft under their management, with the company’s own plane based in Cape Town, but able to service clients wherever required. With about six passengers per trip, and departing Cape Town, the aircraft can reach Angola, Zambia, Malawi and Mozambique. Passengers will also be able to reach the Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania, Kenya and Mauritius from ExecuJet's fixed-base operator at Lanseria International Airport, in Johannesburg.  Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: Intermodal transport systems are vital for growth in South Africa and the SADC region  Gauteng Roads and Transport MEC Dr Ismail Vadi has said that intermodal transport systems are vital for economic growth and development in South Africa and the Southern African Development Community region. Gauteng Roads and Transport MEC Dr Ismail Vadi:  Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.