Datsun South Africa has sold just under 25 000 new Datsuns onto the local market since its launch in April 2014, says Datsun South Africa marketing manager Tessa Cooke. The revived entry-level Japanese brand has two products available in South Africa, namely the Go hatchback and the Go+ seven-seater and panel van. There are more models forthcoming from the brand after a five-year period of sporting a very limited product portfolio, but Cooke declines to comment on which segments the brand plans to enter, or on the time frame of any new product release. She does note, however, that a small sports-utility vehicle, as previously reported, remains in the mix. “We are busy with a global brand repositioning, moving from an affordable brand to a more aspirational brand.” She notes the Datsun will remain focused on affordability, but that it needs to move with its clients as their vehicle requirements evolve – including a quest for greater vehicle safety. Datsun is currently number three in the local A-segment, trailing the Kia Picanto and Renault Kwid. On average, Datsun moves around 600 units a month. Datsun launched at around a 10% market share in the A-segment, which is the fourth biggest passenger-car segment in South Africa. Year-to-date market share is at 22%, says Cooke. An even more interesting fact is that Datsun makes up 34% of total Nissan South Africa passenger-car sales. “We expect the A-segment to grow, especially as consumer confidence is down ahead of elections next year,” says Cooke. Datsuns are normally sold as a first car, the second car in a household, or to retirees. Cooke is hopeful of growing Datsun’s numbers further, through the addition of some new features to the made-in-India Go. Long punted as an affordable, but not so safe vehicle – similar to the Kwid – the refreshed Go now features two front airbags, as well as antilock braking as standard. Standard specifications also include coloured electric side mirrors, reverse parking sensors, central locking, an immobiliser, Android Auto and Apple Car Play connectivity, Bluetooth and USB, front and rear power windows, electric power steering, electrically adjustable mirrors, as well as redesigned individual seats for the driver and front passenger. The Datsun Go and Go+ models are sold with a standard three-year/100 000 km warranty, and an optional service plan. In addition, consumers receive one year insurance with the purchase of a Go or Go+. Pricing starts at R144 500 for the Go and R154 200 for the Go+. Datsun is sold through 114 dealers in South Africa. 