Information and communication technology (ICT) group Dimension Data has expanded its partnership with innovation ecosystem coordinator Silicon Cape after joining as a blue member of the organisation’s Africa-first membership. The Africa-first membership, launched in July, is an evolved model that aims to support structured and proactive engagement with the start-up ecosystem in the wider cape region. “It is exciting to take our relationship with Dimension Data into the next phase of the Silicon Cape evolution,” said Silicon Cape GM Kerry Petrie in a statement on Wednesday. Dimension Data and Silicon Cape are planning a number of strategic collaborations set to be announced in 2019. “The group has already accessed membership benefits such as a dedicated start-up day, where Silicon Cape curated a group of local Internet of Things start-ups to facilitate tech entrepreneurs to engage with Dimension Data's technical and strategic staff teams to stimulate cocreation, collaboration and sharing of technical and market insights,” explained Dimension Data Middle East and Africa CEO Grant Bodley. Meanwhile, Tokyo-headquartered information technology services provider NTT Data Corporation is hosting the ninth Open Innovation Contest in search of new partners and businesses. Dimension Data is hosting the South African applications for the NTT Data Open Innovation Challenge for start-ups. The regional contests will be held across 20 cities in 18 countries, with South African applications for the NTT Data Open Innovation Contest held in Cape Town on February 8 and the regional winners invited to the Grand Finale, in Tokyo, in March 2019. “Any startup is welcome to submit a proposal for a collaborative business with NTT Data in fields such as healthcare and life sciences, finance, insurance and payments, automotive and IoT, RPA and back office, storefront and digital marketing, data distribution and disruptive social innovation,” the company explained. The grand finale winner will receive a three-month in-kind contribution to support the development of their proposed new business. Closing date for entries is November 21.