Global aerospace major Airbus has signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the government of the Côte d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast) to create a cooperation framework which, in turn, will facilitate the development of the West African country’s aerospace industry. The Côte d’Ivoire government has identified this sector as “strategic” for the country’s economic development. “We are confident that this partnership with Airbus will contribute to Côte d’Ivoire’s economic growth as well as support us [to] build a stronger framework for industrial development, creation of jobs and capacity building for our country,” said Ivorian Vice-President Daniel Kablan Duncan. “We are committed to deliver on our vision and make Côte d’Ivoire a hub for aerospace technology in Africa.” “Collaboration between the public and private sector is essential to facilitate economic and industrial growth,” affirmed Airbus Commercial Aircraft president Guillaume Faury. “Through this MoU we will work closely with Côte d’Ivoire’s government, share expertise, discuss opportunities and support efforts in building a robust and sustainable aerospace sector. At Airbus, we are committed to supporting the sustainable socioeconomic development of Africa through partnerships such as this.” The MoU commits Airbus and the Ivorian Government to examine means of cooperation to develop various aerospace industry sectors in the African country. The MoU was signed by Ivorian Transport Minister Amadou Koné and Airbus Africa and Middle East president Mikail Houari. The ceremony was attended by Vice-President Duncan and by Faury. The aerospace sector in Côte d’Ivoire is centred on, and largely composed of, its national airline, Air Côte d’Ivoire. This is based at Abidjan’s Port Bouet Airport and has a fleet of ten aircraft, composed of six Airbus A320-family single-aisle jet airliners (four A319s and two A320s) and four Bombardier Q400 turboprops. The A319s are leased while the two A320s were bought new from Airbus (replacing two leased examples). It has three A320neo (new engine option) airliners on order.