South African company Desert Wolf has started Phase 2 of its contract to design, manufacture and deliver stainless steel diesel-fired field kitchens to the South African National Defence Force, ordered under Project Teamster. The company only uses stainless steel to make its trailers. “During 2016 and 2017 we completed the design and manufacture of the first phase of the project, which encompassed a mobile field cooking unit for 15 people ([designated] FCU-15),” explained company MD Hennie Kieser. “The cornerstone innovation comes from our BOMA-30D 5.5 kW diesel stove using a combination of [grade] 304 and 3CR12 stainless steel, which runs in the field on any grade of diesel available across Africa.” The business uses 3CR12 stainless steel to manufacture the chassis of its trailers, while bodies are made from either 304 or 316 stainless steel. The choice of 304 or 316 is dependent on the intended operating environment of the trailer. “We are now starting on the next phase, where we will deliver the diesel cooking modules for the new 50-man and 200-man containerised kitchens, where we make extensive use of stainless steel throughout the manufacturing process, as these are busy kitchens and hygiene is a priority,” he added. “Each container kitchen will feature two large boiling pans, a flat top double purpose griller and a large convection oven.” Grade 304, 316 and 3CR12 (corrosion resistant) stainless steels are all produced in South Africa. “The joy of using stainless steel is when you see a customer bringing in a trailer for service that is more than 20 years old and still showing no signs of age,” enthused Kieser. The company has already supplied mobile field kitchens to Botswana and Namibia, as well as surveillance and generator equipment to Angola, Ghana and Mozambique. Earlier this year it set up, in the Zambian city of Chingola (Copperbelt province), Desert Wolf Zambia, focused on the mining market in that country. Desert Wolf recently rejoined the Southern Africa Stainless Steel Development Association (Sassda). “The use of stainless steel in this type of military application shows the strength, durability and hygiene benefits synonymous with this ‘noble’ metal,” affirmed Sassda executive director John Tarboton. “The fact that this project is Africa-based shows the potential of the local industry to add value across the continent and grow cross-border opportunities.”