An online learner and driving test pre-booking service have been launched in Gauteng as a step in the right direction towards the modernisation of public services. Gauteng MEC for Roads and Transport, Ismail Vadi on Thursday said: “We are really excited about this partnership with the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) that enables online pre-booking for learner and driving license appointments and online booking for the renewal of driving license cards”. "As a province, we have taken a clear decision to act against fraud and corruption in the public service, including at testing centres. The online service will assist in tightening loopholes in the system," Vadi said. He said that the solution fits in comfortably with the overall “Transformation, Modernisation and Re-industrialisation” agenda of the Gauteng provincial government and demonstrates our commitment to modernising the way in which we deliver services to our people. The new online booking system has several advantages for the residents of Gauteng in that it will reduce the waiting times at the department of license testing centres (DLTCs). Vadi said the system, managed by the RTMC, allows for learner and driving license applicants to choose the date, time and place of their tests. It further allows for online booking for renewal of driving license cards. “The system enhances customer experience, reduces the need to queue for long hours and will improve service levels at testing centres,” said Vadi. "The launch of the pre-booking solution is to be done in two phases. In Phase 1, all DLTCs under the control of the department and in the City of Tshwane will utilise the new system. In Phase 2, the service will be rolled-out to DLTCs in other municipalities in the province," explained Vadi. Vadi said the department was interested in partnering with the RTMC to launch additional online services, which includes online Motor Vehicle Licence Renewals, online Motor Vehicle Registration, online payment of traffic fines, and an online reservation of personalised vehicle license numbers.