Proudly South African (Proudly SA) and RSA Made on Tuesday launched an online shopping site, www.rsamade.co.za, which sells only locally made items. The site forms part of Proudly SA’s Buy Local advocacy campaign, and looks to grow Proudly SA’s members’ share of the burgeoning market that is online shopping – South Africa has an active online shopping population of 18-million, which racked up sales of R37.1-billion in 2017. Proudly SA verifies local content and quality, ensuring that vendor companies adhere to labour and environmental legislation. Proudly SA CEO Eustace Mashimbye commented in a statement that the organisation had been looking at establishing a commercial site for its members for quite some time and that RSA Made’s existing platform and content was a logical match. Mashimbye added that, in the age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, it is vital to tap into digital shopping habits, while ensuring that more locally grown, produced and manufactured goods are available to consumers. Trade and Industry Minister Dr Rob Davies stated that the launch of the site holds great importance for the growth and development of South Africa’s digital economy and push towards increased re-industrialisation and localisation. “Re-industrialisation is a priority [for] growing job opportunities in the country . . . especially in this era where more and more consumers are buying their products on online platforms, this is a much needed solution. “We also have to recognise changing employment patterns and the potential this sector has in creating new employment sources. Technology has the capacity to generate many new skilled jobs, and we must look at the commercialisation of innovations such as online shopping platforms.” The site works on the same basis as other online shopping stores, with a simple product selection and check-out sequence, and with door-to-door delivery within 48 hours within the country’s borders. The site has a fully functioning ticketing system and local event organisers are also encouraged to use this platform for their online ticket sales.