FutureSpace has launched its second workspace, after the first space reached near capacity in just over a year.
 
FutureSpace is a joint venture between Investec Property and workplace specialists Giant Leap.
 
The new instant-access space is located in Rivonia, Sandton, a few blocks down from the first FutureSpace office. “It offers individual offices and booths, as well as open areas designed to meet working needs without the effort and cost of signing and committing to a long-term lease,” said FutureSpace. The company added that, since it launched the first workspace just over a year ago, it has been inundated with demand from executives and consultants who want their own offices as well as start-ups, entrepreneurs and even global companies coming to South Africa that need to start operating quickly. “It’s a sure sign that South Africa continues to adopt the global trends of smart cities and on-demand services. We plan to open further offices in Johannesburg later this year and next – and possibly also in other business centres around the country,” FutureSpace stated. Giant Leap director Linda Trim noted the success of FutureSpace lies in it being aligned with global trends away from ownership and towards instant access. FutureSpace offers fully fledged offices with everything a business requires from high-speed fibre WiFi, concierge, support staff to meeting rooms and video conferencing. There is also a gym in the building and 24-hour electronic security. Barista coffee and food is also available. The FutureSpace offices are designed to meet different office needs with monthly pricing ranging from R3 500 to R20 000. Shorter-term rates and day rates are also available. “Instead of owning everything, people rather want access to whatever they need right now. Instead of having an expensive car, many people call an Uber when they want to travel. Instead on having a holiday home, people rent an Airbnb in seconds. “Office space is no different, in major cities like London, New York and Sydney, people book office space for only when they need it. It is a rapidly growing, extremely cost effective trend that is now gathering pace in South Africa,” noted Trim. She added that it can take months to find suitable office space and just as long again to install information technology services, furniture and interior design. “With FutureSpace, you simply book and pay for your office online – or simply walk in – and you can start working straight away. CONFLICT RESOLUTION BOOST
The second workspace happens to be playing host to the path-breaking International Arbitration Centre. “By providing a neutral, independent, specially designed facilities for the global business community, the FutureSpace International Arbitration Centre will help solve some of South Africa’s most difficult litigation locally, meaning it will be cheaper and quicker,” said Trim.
 
In December 2017, South Africa adopted the International Arbitration Act for the first time. The Act incorporates into law in South Africa the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Model Law.
 
This means South Africa can now host arbitration hearings when, previously, companies had to head to Europe. The new arbitration centre mirrors best in class arbitration design facilities overseas.