Energy Minister Jeff Radebe released the much-anticipated draft updated Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) for public comment on Monday, offering stakeholders 60 days to provide written feedback.
 
The comment period was extended from the 30 days initially envisaged after a meeting of the National Economic Development and Labour Council on Friday, where business, labour and community representatives urged the Minister to provide more time for input.
 
Radebe expressed the hope that Cabinet would adopt the ‘IRP 2018’ soon after the culmination of the comment period to ensure that there was certainty for South Africa’s electricity generation roadmap for the next 12 years.
 
In fact, limiting the IRP’s time horizon to 2030 was one of the major adjustments made to the document when compared with an initial draft update released in November 2016, which outlined a base case for allocations until 2050.
 
That draft IRP was also heavily criticised for having deviated from a least-cost generation mix by imposing artificial limits on the amount of variable renewable energy that could be introduced yearly.
 
The IRP 2018 draft continues to impose policy adjustments on the least-cost generation mix, including the yearly limits on renewables. However, these adjustments, and their costs, have been fully disclosed.
 
The document also states explicitly that the “least-cost plan” to 2030 contained only solar photovoltaic (PV), onshore wind, and gas and, thus, included no new nuclear and new coal.
 
Nevertheless, five policy adjustments have been made to that least-cost path in IRP2018, including:
·      The retention of annual build limits on renewables for the period up to 2030.
·      The inclusion of 1 000 MW of coal-to-power in 2023 and 2024, based on two coal independent power producer (IPP) projects already procured by government.
·      The inclusion of 2 500 MW of hydropower in 2030 to facilitate a treaty signed by South Africa and the Democratic Republic of Congo for the Inga Hydro Power Project.
·      The utilisation the existing solar PV, wind and gas allocations in the plan to enable, through Ministerial determinations, procurement.
·      Allocations of 200 MW a year for certain categories of “generation-for-own-use” of between 1 MW to 10 MW, starting in 2018. These allocations will not be discounted off the capacity allocations in the plan, but will be considered during the issuing of Ministerial Determinations.
 
As a result, the policy-adjusted plan includes the following new additional capacity by 2030: 1 000 MW of coal, 2 500 MW from hydro, 5 670 MW of solar PV, 8 100 MW of wind and 8 100 MW from gas.
 
Radebe said that an IRP to 2050 would still be considered, which could lead to the introduction of other technologies, such as nuclear and clean coal, in future.
 
However, that longer-horizon IRP would also be informed by four studies covering:
·      The socioeconomic impact of the decommissioning of old coal-fired power plants that would have reached their end of life.
·      a detailed analysis of gas supply options to better understand the technical and financial risks and required mitigations for a renewable energy and gas dominated electricity generation mix post 2030.
·      A detailed analysis of the appropriate level of penetration of renewable energy in the South African national grid to better understand the technical risks and mitigations required to ensure security of supply is maintained during the transition to low carbon future.
·      And detailed technical, cost and economic benefit analysis of other clean energy technologies such clean coal technology, nuclear and others.
 
Radebe appealed to the public and the stakeholders to engage with the report with the understanding that a “just transition required that, while we move with speed to respond to the changing landscape, we take calculated steps to ensure we leave no one behind”.