The KML range of corrosion-resistant, food-grade ball bearings, distributed exclusively in Southern Africa by leading supplier BI, continue to set the quality and hygiene benchmark in the food-and-beverage industry. With over 35 years’ experience in power transmission, KML Bearings has developed a high level of technical competence as a leading international manufacturer of high-quality bearing products, which is why BI is proud to be the company’s local distribution partner. KML bearings are filled with FDA- and HACCP-approved Mobil FM22 food-grade grease, while the insert bearings are made from 440C stainless steel for optimum raceway and ball bearing heat-treatment hardening. The flingers and retainers are made from 304 grade stainless steel for high corrosion resistance. All housing units have smooth surfaces that can be cleaned easily with high-pressure washing equipment. The housings include stainless steel sleeves for fixing bolts and stainless steel grease fittings. BI Agriculture Product Manager Gerhard Pienaar explains that KML’s thermoplastic and stainless steel mounted food-processing bearings have been designed specifically to deal with frequent washing, contaminants, exposure to cleaning agents, and constant temperature changes. “Food-and-beverage processing machinery is the most challenging for bearing-unit performance. However, the KML housings more than meet the specific requirements for materials used in food-and-beverage equipment,” Pienaar highlights. KML offers two types of mounted units for the food-and-beverage industry, namely standard composite and thermoplastic units. The mounted composite housings resist corrosion from processing chemicals and frequent washings. The units also have greater shock resistance than typical cast iron, comprising high-grade glass-filled thermoplastic polyester. In addition, they are interchangeable with conventional cast-iron housings. The thermoplastic units are maintenance-free, with high mechanical strength and stability. The smooth surfaces are more hygienic than cast-iron housings, where the rougher surfaces may harbour harmful dirt, mould, or bacteria. Special features of the KML bearings include their ability to reduce the number of interfaces by integrating functions, a compact design, and the fact that they require no maintenance, as they are lubricated throughout their lifespan. All components and subsystems are matched precisely to one another. The KML bearings are ideal for use in various applications where they are exposed to moisture, corrosive, and abrasive conditions, such as in food-processing and packaging plants; beverage, brewing, and bottling plants; meat, poultry and seafood processing plants; the dairy industry; sugar processing; pharmaceutical; chemicals; rubber and plastic; pulp and paper mills; marine and naval applications; car washes; refrigeration and freezer plants; agricultural harvesting plants and machinery; municipal (sand and salt spreaders); and a range of materials-handling machinery and conveyor systems.