Enel Global Renewable Energies’ Enel Green Power (EGP) division, in Southern Africa, has reached financial close on five new wind farms with about 700 MW in capacity. The five wind farms – Nxuba and Oyster Bay, in the Eastern Cape, and Garob, Karusa and Soetwater, in the Northern Cape – have a capacity of about 140 MW each, and were all awarded in round four of the South African government’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme. Each project is minority-owned by a local partner. The total investment value is about €1.2-billion, of which Enel will contribute about €230-million in equity for the construction of the wind farms, and the remaining €950-million will be contributed by senior lenders Nedbank and Absa. Following the financial close, construction of the first wind farm, Nxuba, is expected to start by the end of this year. It is expected to be operational in the second half of 2020. Construction of the Oyster Bay and Garob wind farms is expected to start by the first half of 2019, while construction of the Soetwater and Karusa wind farms is expected to start in the second half of 2019. Oyster Bay will become operational in the first half of 2021, while Garob, Soetwater and Karusa will become operational in the second half of 2021. By 2021, all five new wind farms are due to be up and running, bringing EGP’s total installed capacity in the country to more than 1.2 GW. Once operational, the five projects are expected to produce around 2.6 TWh/y, saving about 2.7-million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions every year. EGP head Antonio Cammisecra commented that the company had “reached an important milestone in South Africa by achieving financial close on five major wind projects which confirm [the company’s] continuing commitment to the country’s renewables sector, within a context of sustainable development”. He added that EGP will support these processes by generating its emission-free energy in partnership with local shareholders and in cooperation with the local communities, according to Enel’s long-term vision of shared value creation.