The legal profession, among most other knowledge professions, is being changed through the use of machine learning tools to ensure legal information is leveraged and disseminated efficiently to lawyers, enabling them to fulfil their tasks more quickly and more accurately, law firm Cliffe Dekker Hofmyer (CDH) knowledge management director Retha Beerman said on Wednesday. At a legal seminar covering the nebulous topic of artificial intelligence (AI), she introduced the company’s e-discovery system Insight, which it built to suit its purpose with information management service provider iManage and using technology from document extraction subsidiary Ravn. The Insight system, which is currently in its pilot phase after passing an initial test phase, aims to effectively leverage the company’s wealth of legal information and intellectual property by allowing intelligent searches to be performed by its lawyers and providing them with a wealth of relevant and usable information, she said. This search-and-surface system, which restricts access to information based on user privileges, confidentiality and a host of security protocols, will replace its current document management system, and reduces the time needed to find documents, as well as enriching the searches by providing additional information based on information such as client details, precedents and judgments, and notes and articles by experts on applicable laws. CDH director Neil Comte highlighted that the company had to determine a return on investment for the system. It used a comparative analysis of 394 searches done using its existing document management system and the Insight system, and measured the impact on its lawyers. The average time saved per search was 1 minute and 37 seconds, the accuracy of documents presented was 7% higher and the ability to find the correct result was 14% higher than the existing system. Based on these figures, the company determined that it could achieve a return on investment in less than a year, he said. “Efficient knowledge management using AI can help to reduce the costs to clients. As a department, we are responsible for streaming knowledge to our lawyers. This raw data includes cases, articles and information about the client. However, it is not just about the raw data, but about converted data, such as relevant precedents, agreements, notices to clients. In this lies a massive amount of our intellectual property,” said Beerman. “If we can find and present it to the teams quickly and leverage on the knowledge again, we become better with associated benefits for our lawyers and clients.” Beerman added that the knowledge department aimed to improve its ability to effectively and efficiently meet the needs of its professionals by using machine learning. CDH dispute resolution practice director and forensic investigation specialist Zaakir Mohamed said the e-discovery platform was a godsend for the investigations team, as it helped them to accurately deal with urgent matters. For a single case, the team had to search through 70 000 emails, or about 50 to 60 lever-arch files full of documents. The client required them to provide accurate advice within a week. The team loaded the information onto the platform and identified several important pieces of information within a few hours. Within three days, the team had found the information necessary to provide suitable advice. “We were able to find the information we needed because we knew the issues in the matter and set the parameters for the e-discovery system. It is more efficient to work off an e-discovery system,” he said. Additionally, the team was sent an urgent request for documents from the same client and found all the relevant documents within ten minutes to counter an argument presented by the opposing team. “The tools are designed to facilitate access to relevant information quickly and repeatedly, and not just as a one-off, but as a trend that will improve service and communications with clients.” iManage-Ravn commercial director David Fisk highlighted that most of the data discovery systems used in the legal, medical and financial industries worldwide use components of AI, which are grouped mainly under machine learning. These include deep learning, predictive analytics, natural language processing, classification, clustering and information extraction. “We consider the Insight system an information platform. It is an approach to leverage information repositories and historical information within a firm to provide better service rapidly and cost-effectively.” The datasets are connected to one another and relationships are built between the data to enable relevant data to be surfaced for consumption. This is the main value proposition of these systems, he explained. “The system uses three components in the application layer. The first is the machine learning models that include natural language, classification and clustering components, among others. “The second is an extract component to draw information from unstructured content to enable quicker use, such as presenting the most pertinent provisions in an estate contract to a lawyer to advise the client. “The final component is the search layer, which uses the architecture of the company’s information management system to build relationships between information and navigate quickly through a diverse dataset.”