South Africa’s second largest airline company, Comair, and American software-industrial group Honeywell announced on Friday that the airline has chosen the US group’s advanced cockpit technologies suite to equip the Boeing 737-800 MAX 8 airliners that it is acquiring. The suite will include a three-dimensional weather radar system (the IntuVue RDR-4000). “Our new fleet additions will enable us to be on the cutting edge of aerospace technology and in a leadership position among airlines in the region,” affirmed Comair CEO Erik Venter. “Supplementing that with some of the best navigation and weather equipment from Honeywell International Inc., means that we can keep our commitment to safety and ensure passengers reach their destinations quickly and comfortably.” “Maintaining reliable, safe service is of maximum importance to airlines, especially as they look for new and impactful ways to upgrade their fleets,” highlights Honeywell International aerospace leader: Africa Rudolph Louw. “Working with Honeywell International Inc. provides pilots with the intelligence they need to not only make incremental adjustments in the flight route to save time and fuel, but also avoid patches of turbulent weather. Ultimately this helps drive fuel and maintenance efficiencies, while promoting a positive passenger experience.” Apart from the IntuVue RDR-4000 radar, the other major elements of the cockpit suite are an Integrated Multi-Mode Receiver, a SmartTraffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System, and a Mark II+ Communications Management Unit. With these systems, Comair will be able to meet not only existing, but also upcoming, regulations from the US Federal Aviation Administration. The IntuVue RDR-4000 is the first automatic commercial weather radar, with a bad weather detection range 5% better than other radars. It can detect turbulence as much as 60 nautical miles (nm) ahead of an aircraft and predict lightning and hail. The Integrated Multi-Mode Receiver gives the aircraft cutting edge radio navigation abilities, accessing both ground-based and satellite-based navigation systems in a single, lightweight, receiver. It allows the flight crew to precisely locate the position of their aircraft, while reducing volume and weight by as much as half in comparison to other systems. The SmartTraffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System can detect incoming aircraft at a range of 100 nm. It is an active surveillance system that gives the pilots an excellent awareness of other air traffic and so reduces risks during flight. The Mark II+ Communications Management Unit is responsible for managing two-way air-ground data link communications, This allows the transmission of the airliner’s health and position data, in real time. It also links the pilots with their airline’s operations centre. Comair will take delivery of its first 737 MAX 8s in January 2019. It has eight on order and their delivery will compete the airline’s fleet replacement strategy. Comair operates the British Airways in South Africa and the Kulula low cost carrier brands.