The Southern African Venture Capital and Private Equity Association (Savca) is launching the inaugural Savca Industry Awards, aimed at recognising portfolio companies that have thrived from private equity and venture capital investment in Southern Africa.
	
	All investee companies headquartered in Southern Africa and currently benefitting from these types of investments, or that have had investors exit within the last 12 months, are eligible for consideration by the judging panel. Judges will comprise business leaders and captains of industry, with the awards being supported and sponsored by Investec Corporate and Institutional Banking.
	
	“With an increased government focus on small business as a contributor to overall gross domestic product and employment growth, these awards will serve to highlight the achievements of portfolio companies as they relate to innovation, environmental and social impacts, profit and investor returns, job creation and reputation,” said Savca CEO Tanya van Lill.
	
	Categories include small companies – seed/early-stage growth investments with an enterprise value of under R50-million; medium-sized companies – expansion stage investments with an enterprise value of R50-million to R1-billion; and large companies – with an enterprise value of more than R1-billion. The Savca Awards will also include a ‘Chairman’s Award’, which will recognise exemplary work within the sector, awarded at the judges’ discretion.
	
	“We are delighted to be associated with the very first Savca Industry Awards as lead sponsor. We are especially proud to be part of an event that recognises the exceptional performance of portfolio companies in the sector, as well as their contribution to society and Southern Africa as a whole,” Investec Corporate and Institutional Banking head Lourens van Rensburg noted.
	
	Private equity and venture capital investors can nominate investee companies or these businesses can nominate themselves by submitting an entry form via the Savca Awards website. Judges will select a shortlist of finalists across the outlined categories who will be assessed and interviewed. These findings will be presented to the judging panel, with the process culminating in winners being announced at a gala dinner and awards ceremony at Monte Casino, in November.
	
	Nominations for the awards close on April 15.