The City of Durban is on track to start its GO!Durban integrated public transport network from Pinetown’s central business district (CBD) to KwaMashu’s Bridge City in the latter part of this year. Aligned to the eThekwini municipality’s vision to be Africa’s most caring and liveable city by 2030, this integrated public transport network will give people access to places and opportunities in Durban. The first route, which features a dedicated road lane only accessed by the new state-of-the-art GO!Durban buses, runs from Anderson street, in Pinetown’s CBD, to Bridge City in KwaMashu, using the provincial road MR577, or Dumisani Makhaye.
	
	“The new transport system is a game-changer for the city. Globally, we have seen how transport systems have worked to improve the liveability of a city and unlock economic and social opportunities. So, our first provision of a route in an area so in need of opportunities and development, is very exciting.
	
	“This has been, and still remains one of the important catalytic programmes we have embarked on. As part of the overall process of providing a new safe and reliable system, current public transport operator leadership and our city’s leadership are planning how they will participate and integrate into the new system for the benefit of all stakeholders,” said Mayor Zanile Gumede.
	
	Areas and precincts along the route have started to attract investors and interest in developments, as the transport network now has the potential to attract critical mass to stimulate economic growth. Along the routes, upgrades of urban precinct nodes with new lighting, street furniture and landscaping, have already begun to alter the way in which people use these spaces, making for much more user-friendly and safer environments.
	
	“Our message to citizens is that we can deliver the infrastructure and systems, but ultimately it is yours to embrace, look after and use for the betterment of all. This is a legacy project which means getting around the city and accessing opportunities will continue to improve, and in that there is enormous hope.”
	
	“The city will be embarking on a communication campaign in the second quarter of the year to create awareness of how the new system will work, so that by the time it begins, commuters fully understand how to use it,” she added.