Power equipment manufacturer Himoinsa has expanded its local African teams and partners to meet the growing demand for custom-designed power systems and generators in the construction and mining sectors, Himoinsa Europe, Middle East and Africa director Guillermo Elum said on Monday. The demand for efficiency and reliability of power systems used by mining and construction companies on the continent mirrors the global emphasis on hybrid power systems that can use a range of power sources, including renewable energy, storage and grid power, as the needs of the application dictate, he noted. Himoinsa leverages its local experts, in Port Elizabeth, in the Eastern Cape, and Midrand, in Gauteng, and its distributors and partners to gain detailed, technical information from clients on the intended application and operating conditions. Engineers at its main factory and headquarters in Spain, as well as in its eight other factories across the world, then design and build a system that functions efficiently and cost-effectively under the operating conditions and process demands. This often includes the ability to use various sources of energy at different times. Additionally, the company has robust rental operations that are deployed to provide power on site while the engineered systems are being built or for projects of indefinite duration. Further, the company’s distribution partners provide a range of engineering services for customers at their sites in Africa, and the company also provides training and skills transfer for its clients and partners on the continent. “We manufacture all the components and systems, from control panels to generators. Our engineering expertise enables us to meet customer demands, whether it is for a hybrid power solution, to overcome difficult operating conditions, such as high or low ambient temperatures, abrasive or dusty conditions or high altitude, or the ability to adjust power output to meet demand.” Worldwide, there is a transition to hybrid power systems and cleaner emissions standards are also driving the use of gas for power in Europe. Generators, back-up and hybrid power systems are enabling in situ generation while providing low-noise power, added Elum. These systems are increasingly playing a role in stabilising variable grids. Electricity utilities are also showing an interest in generators and hybrid power solutions to reduce transmission losses and the need to build transmission infrastructure. “We build customised and hybrid solutions specifically designed for projects and industries and invite all attendees at [construction exposition] Bauma Africa to visit our stands A60 and B33, in Hall 6,” he concluded.