The City of Cape Town on Thursday said the use of treated effluent water would increase water security in the city as approval had now been given for the supply of up to 10-million litres of treated effluent to various businesses from collection points across the city. According to the City, 75-million litres a day is already being supplied through permanent pipeline connections. Treated effluent, or recycled water, is wastewater that has been treated at a wastewater treatment plant and then piped via a separate network of pipes to various consumers. In Cape Town, this water is not used as drinking water but for irrigation and industrial purposes, and for the flushing of toilets. The City’s Mayoral Committee Member for Informal Settlements, Water and Waste Services Xanthea Limberg said the city was continually working to manage water consumption in Cape Town and these efforts were being intensified due to the current drought. The statement added that the City is also rolling out supply of treated effluent water for flushing toilets in areas where permanent connections exist. The statement made special mention of Century City, where treated effluent water has been plumbed into various buildings for toilet flushing, including the Canal Walk shopping mall, the conference centre, and various offices. Incorporation of treated effluent water for toilet flushing is also being done at the City’s wastewater treatment facilities. "In addition, retrofitting of Council buildings and Council houses with water saving fittings continues," the statement added. "The typical fittings in retrofits are aerators, water saving taps, water saving showerheads, dual-flush toilet cisterns, and water management devices. "The City has also partnered with the department of public works to reduce consumption at its facilities. Through the installation of water saving fittings, the reduction in water pressure and a programme of leak detection and repair, a combined saving of 9.2-million litres a day has been achieved at its 20 biggest facilities which mostly include defence force bases, police stations, and prisons." Limberg added: "Management of other large facilities in Cape Town should take note of the significant savings that can be achieved through using treated effluent water and the installation of water-saving systems. "Not only will this assist in increasing water security, but it will also save them money. Treated effluent is supplied at a lower cost than municipal drinking water. The City is continually looking to expand the treated effluent reticulation areas of the city and increase usage of treated effluent water. As such I am calling on all businesses to explore where treated effluent can replace drinking water in their processes," she added.