The illegal trade in wildlife has become a major form of transnational organised crime that is damaging economies, undermining public safety and good governance in many regions around the world. And Southern Africa is no exception. “Criminals involved in wildlife crime are not involved only in wildlife crime,” stressed Endangered Wildlife Trust programme manager: wildlife and trade programme Ashleigh Dore. She was talking to Engineering News Online on the fringes of the British Government-funded Regional Prosecutor Workshop on Illegal Wildlife Trade in Kempton Park, east of Johannesburg, on Tuesday. “Wildlife crime should be taken seriously; not only is it a high value crime but it attracts big criminal players, who are also involved in smuggling drugs, weapons, and seek to corrupt government officials,” she explained. “It is a public security issue, not a niche ‘green’ issue. Further, wildlife crime can also damage the legitimate economy, for example by damaging the tourist industry through the poaching of major attractions like elephants and rhinos.” Fortunately, there is no need to persuade the national prosecution agencies of the countries of Southern Africa about the seriousness of the issue. “Our experience is that they take wildlife crime very seriously,” she reported. “Our workshops are usually attended by senior personnel, dedicated to combatting wildlife crimes. They have always shown great interest and there is a strong demand for us to supply them with more information.” The current workshop is being attended by representatives from Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia and Swaziland, as well as South Africa. All the countries in the region have similar wildlife protection structures, with national parks services and park rangers, supported by their national police forces, customs, and other agencies. “For the most part, legislation and regulation in Southern Africa is solid,” she observed. “The problem, including in South Africa, is a lack of capacity. This often requires crime related to certain species to be prioritised over crime related to other species.” The workshop, the third in an ongoing series, combines theoretical and practical (role-playing) sessions. It will also serve as a preparation for a global Illegal Wildlife Trade Conference, funded by the UK government, which will be held in London in October. “Wildlife crime is not just about rhino poaching; it expands to various species, including plants,” highlighted Dore. “I have met really dedicated people in all the agencies I have worked with. When it comes to fighting the illegal wildlife trade in our region, I am realistically optimistic – while I fully acknowledge that we have lost a lot, there are really positive developments and successes within this landscape that must be acknowledged.”