The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) on Thursday said its opposition to Eskom’s power purchase agreements with independent power producers (IPPs) was because the State had not consulted workers on the impact of the deal. Numsa and Transform RSA used the courts to block the long-awaited signing of agreements with 27 renewable IPPs on Monday night. Numsa spokesperson Phakamile Hlubi told Polity that the union supported the country ending its dependence on fossil fuels; however, the union was after a “just transition”. Indeed, the union said that solar panels were installed at its regional office, in central Johannesburg, as part of a R15.5-million refurbishment in 2013, because it supported renewable energy. She said the union would not sacrifice its member’s livelihoods for the sake of renewable energy. “The government agreed to these principles and signed the Paris Agreement, which speaks about these principles, but is blatantly ignoring them. The just transition speaks about social dialogue, social protection, rights at work and employment as indispensable building blocks of sustainability,” said Hlubi. Numsa believes that there has been no social dialogue and that government is trying to “bully workers into accepting a decision which is detrimental to their wellbeing”. “The problem of climate change cannot be solved by creating another problem of joblessness and poverty. We want guarantees that no jobs will be lost,” she said. She went on to state that in the conversation around the IPPs, in early 2017, Eskom had confirmed that the signing of the deal would mean the closure of at least five coal-fired power stations, and the loss of 30 000 jobs. “The IPPs were unable to give guarantees about job creation. We, therefore, reject it because it is going to have dire consequences on workers in Mpumalanga, and on the economy as a whole. It will cost Eskom more money to procure from IPPs. Who will pay that difference? Clearly the State expects the workers and their families to fork out more for electricity,” Hlubi said. Numsa said it was not convinced that 61 000 jobs will be created through renewable energy projects, as promised by government. Hlubi said that contrary to the “propaganda” of Energy Minister Jeff Radebe, the majority of renewable energy companies are foreign-owned and will not benefit locals. She added that those who did not find work would join the ranks of the unemployed, deepening the crisis of unemployment and poverty. When asked about the R56-billion in new investment which Radebe said would be injected into the economy over the next two to three years to support economic growth, Hlubi said Radebe was talking about jobless growth. She emphasised that thousands of families would lose their jobs and would not benefit from those investments.