From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Fast-moving consumer goods manufacturer RCL Foods launched a new pet food manufacturing facility, in Randfontein, earlier this month. Megan van Wyngaardt has the story. Megan Van Wyngaardt: Through the establishment of the 1 500 m2 facility, which employs around 700 people, the company aims to take a greater share in the R5-billion-a-year South African pet food market. RCL Foods Groceries business unit executive Francois Roetz tells us more. RCL Foods Business Unit Director Francois Roetz: Megan Van Wyngaardt: RCL Foods currently holds 40% of the retail sector and will focus on gaining clientele in the vet market and, with the new facility, the company’ pet food production increased by 60%, from 7 000 t/m to 12 000 t/m. RCL Foods Business Unit Director Francois Roetz: Megan Van Wyngaardt: RCL Foods consumer business MD Scott Pitman said the company aimed to double its profit from the pet food market within the next three years and would achieve this goal by continually implementing new innovations. RCL Foods consumer business MD Scott Pitman Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: Himoinsa sees demand growth in construction and mining in Africa And, CSIR makes progress on first African climate change model Power equipment manufacturer Himoinsa has expanded its local African teams and partners to meet the growing demand for custom-designed power systems and generators in the construction and mining sectors. Himoinsa Southern Africa MD Martin Foster:  The Council for Scientific and Industrial Researchis making progress in developing the first Africa-based earth system model to provide reliable projections of the potential impact of climate change on the continent.  CSIR natural resources and environment executive director May Hermanus:  Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.