A new upmarket apartment hotel development, The Regency, situated in the heart of Pretoria’s Menlyn node area, has entered its final stage of construction and development. The apartment hotel was initially due to open it doors in 2016, but has experienced delays in acquiring the proper zoning permits, which slowed developmental progress, says developer Key Spirit Development CEO Rodney Wolmer. While acquiring permits presented as the development’s biggest challenge to date, the apartment hotel development is on track for its June 1, 2018, launch. The R350-million development has reached the peak of its construction phase. Wolmer states that the project employs over 1 000 people that are working tirelessly to bring the project to completion. Engineering News Online was part of a site tour of the development that consists of 220 fully furnished, ‘lock-up-and-go’ style suites. The Regency Hotel Group MD Siyanda Dlamini states that, “no expense has been spared with each luxury apartment fitted with top quality finishes, including energy saving appliances by Miele, centralised air-conditioning, a restaurant, bar, bespoke gym, high-end security with 24-hour surveillance and ample underground parking”.
	
	The development was designed by architectural firm Archactive International and developed by Key Spirit Development, with the specific intention of catering to the needs and requirements of local and international professionals such as diplomats and investors, says Dlamini. “[The Regency’s] proximity to a major commercial node, as well as the tranquillity that the Pretoria area offers, with lush greenery and a river nearby, really allows the development to stand apart from any competitors,” says Wolmer. He explains that the development will provide ease of access to key business areas in the vicinity, while still providing a modern and aesthetically pleasing surrounding in which busy business-people can unwind. The Regency apartment hotel has already sold 85% of its apartments. Although it has not opened the hotel for overnight bookings just yet, Dlamini explains that, “it looks forward to hosting [its] very first guest".