French multinational company Alstom is in talks with various municipalities around South Africa on an integrated tramline system, using Alstom-developed SRS technology. Speaking to Engineering News Online during a tour of Alstom’s tram manufacturing facility in Reims, France, last week, Alstom tramway system director Jean Francois Blanc said that Alstom visited South Africa in December and gave presentations to municipalities in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban and Cape Town. He pointed out that Alstom was invited by South African authorities to participate in a seminar, together with other French authorities, adding that the company gave a presentation about public-private partnership transport integration in cities across the country. “We have received a lot of interest for integrated tram systems from various municipalities throughout South Africa, most of which already have public transport projects and are looking at different opportunities in that space,” he said. Alstom Southern Africa MD Xavier Boisgontier noted that forecasts for Africa’s population growth were high and that the demand for integrated transportation services would be strong in the future, mainly owing to the effect of urbanisation and the need for sustainable development. “Integrated tram systems are ideal candidates to address these issues. Our vision is to be close to our customers and to thoroughly understand their mobility needs. Therefore, proximity is key in our strategy,” he said. With almost 4 000 employees, as well as design and project management offices, project worksites and maintenance facilities, Alstom has been well established in the Middle East and Africa (MEA) region for a long time. The group’s portfolio includes several innovations to better address mobility needs with products and solutions adapted to the MEA region. “Therefore, we are ready to respond to all mobility needs in all MEA countries, including requests to develop integrated systems in South Africa. We want to offer our support to be a part of the building of the rail industry of countries and be the preferred partner for rail development in MEA countries,” he said. Blanc further commented that tramway systems had been used to help cities become more attractive by renewing the urban environment and linking together points of interest, like hospitals, universities and city centres. He noted that tramway systems were more energy efficient than bus systems, and had less resistance to motion, which decreases the amount of electricity they used. Blanc pointed out that Alstom’s SRS was a ground-based static charging system, compatible with all types of tramways. The technology was also designed to address the road market by supplying power to electrical buses through ground-based charging slots at stations or at terminus. When using SRS, he explained that electrical power came from compact power supply cabinets that were easily integrated into stations. “Collector shoes, or contact blocks, fitted under the tram, make contact with the conductor rail, providing electric traction power to the tram.” Supercapacitors installed on the roof of the tram store energy through a ground-based conductive rail, which provides traction power to the vehicle through the collector shoes. “SRS stores energy recharged during tram stations stops in less than 20 seconds,” he noted. SRS tramway infrastructure could last for up to 30 years, while the tram cars had the potential to last up to 30 years, with the right maintenance. “We are carrying on with discussions, but nothing has been materialised,” Blanc said of Alstom’s interaction with South African municipalities. DUNNOTTAR UPDATE Meanwhile, Boisgontier provided an update on Gibela's new train manufacturing plant and training centre complex in Dunnottar, Ekurhuleni, where construction is nearing completion. Alstom has an interest in the Gibela Rail Transport consortium, which has to deliver 600 new X-Trapolis Mega commuter trains to the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA) in terms of a deal signed in 2014. Work has started on the manufacture of the first of 580 six-car X’Trapolis Mega commuter trains. The passenger trains run at speeds of 120 km/h and have been designed to run up to 160 km/h. They can accommodate up to 1 200 passengers in six cars, although the modular design permits adjustments for periods of higher and lower demand. The first 20 trains were manufactured in Brazil and 18 of these trains are already being operated by PRASA in the Pienaarspoort – Rissik Street corridor. The Brazilian programme was aimed at facilitating speedy delivery of the first trains and also to enable the training and transfer of skills on modern train technology to Gibela employees. “That training, at more than 14 Alstom centres of excellence worldwide, has been hugely successful, enabling South African technicians and engineers to play a significant role in the validation and testing of the trains on home soil at PRASA’s Wolmerton depot,” Boisgontier said. More than one-third of Gibela’s now 625 employees have received various offshore transfer of technology in technical and general management skills development. Currently, the plant where the remaining rolling stock – 580 trains – will be manufactured is due for completion this month. “The contract to manufacture the plant was awarded to a 100% black and business women owned joint venture (JV). As a result of the award, the construction JV partners have benefitted greatly from Alstom’s stringent construction and health and safety standards, resulting in the near completion of the plant with minimal lost time injury frequency rates,” Boisgontier said. At peak production, 62 trains a year will roll out of the Dunnottar plant, with the first one to be handed over to PRASA at the end of this year.