Chair of State capture commission of inquiry Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo on Wednesday announced key appointments to the inquiry, which included former auditor general Terence Nombembe. Nombembe, who is now chief executive of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants, will head a team of investigators. Other key appointments are legal eagles Leah Gcabashe, Vincent Maleka, Thandi Norman and Paul Pretorius as part of the legal team. The legal team will be headed by Pretorius. He will be evidence leader, and alternate with the other advocates. Khotso De Wee, who is the director at University of Fort Hare Solutions was appointed secretary of the commission. Zondo said it was not yet confirmed when the commission would commence with its work, but indicated that it could be in the next few months. The investigators are expected to start work in two weeks. The commission would do its work in a fair and professional manner, said Zondo. "The desired outcome of this commission, after we hand over the report to the president and it is made public, is for the public to understand the depth of the State capture and who were involved," he told reporters. "The outcome is to make sure South Africa does not find itself in that situation again. Those found to have committed criminal conduct would need to be dealt with in terms of our criminal justice system." He added that the multidisciplinary team of investigators' identity would not be disclosed, to ensure their security and that of the work of the commission. Former president Jacob Zuma earlier this year announced Zondo as head of the State capture inquiry as per former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela's recommendations that Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng recommend a judge to head the inquiry, instead of Zuma appointing one as he was implicated. Madonsela prescribed that her report, titled 'State of Capture', should be the basis on which the inquiry is based. It took nearly two years for Zuma, who is challenging the report in the courts, to establish the long awaited commission. However, in the aftermath of the African National Congress (ANC) 54th national conference, the governing party resolved that the matter be expedited even though Zuma challenged last year's high court judgement ordering him to appoint the commission within a month.