UK-based Sita Air Transport Community Foundation, in conjunction with the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits) and the Tshimologong precinct, has launched an innovation competition to address the question of what information, tools or technology first-time air travellers in Africa will need to make their journeys easier, more successful and enjoyable. The winner with the best response to the challenge will receive $10 000, or about R110 000. “Africa is predicted to grow faster than any other region in the next 20 years. Taking this growth into account, and the increasing penetration of mobile and digital technologies, Sita wanted to offer up the challenge to the people most likely to make up this new generation of air travellers,” states Tshimologong precinct partner engagement manager Itumeleng Dhlamini. She added that Sita, as an air transport information and communication technology (ICT) specialist, has partnered with Wits since 2015 to support students from Africa who need financial backing to succeed in their studies; and to add much-needed skills and expertise to the aviation industry through support for targeted academic disciplines. The competition is open to Wits students and active members of the Tshimologong precinct. Each team, comprising two members to five members, needs to submit an initial two-minute video after attending a drop-in session on March 27 to better understand the issue, project and overall requirements. The deadline for video submissions is April 24, after which a shortlist will be announced on May 2. Submissions can include a well-defined proof of concept; data modelling and recommendations based on data analytics; detailed research with recommendations for future activities; and the use of technology to address the issue. Preliminary judging will take place in early July, after which final presentations and judging will be concluded at an awards ceremony, which will be held on July 20. “Sita’s aim is to provide ICT and education for learners in Africa, and to help build key skills for the next generation. We created the innovation award to highlight the challenges and opportunities for a continent that is seeing a changing demographic coupled with growth in technology and aviation,” says Dhlamini.