From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley:
	With over 15 years in the food and beverage industry, food manufacturing company Trojan Foods has expanded into packaging services in response to the increased demand for specialised packaging solutions in the industry. Melissa Zisengwe tells us more. Melissa Zisengwe:
	Trojan Foods was primarily focused on producing goods in bulk for application in big kitchens across the catering industry, from mines to hospitals and so forth. Trojan Foods MD Kwena Setati: Melissa Zisengwe:
	Setati tells us how Trojan Foods goes about testing food quality of their products. Trojan Foods is certified with a Food Safety System Certification (FSSC) 22000 certificate for food safety and quality management. Trojan Foods MD Kwena Setati: Melissa Zisengwe: Trojan Foods recently acquired machinery that will enable it to offer packaging and blending services to existing clients and attract new clients. Trojan Foods MD Kwena Setati: Melissa Zisengwe:
	Although Trojan Foods is expanding into the packaging industry, it has not been immune to the realities of the economy. Most raw materials used by Trojan are agro-based, exposing the business to economic factors like price shocks caused by adverse weather. Trojan Foods MD Kwena Setati: Sashnee Moodley:
	Other News making headlines CSIR makes progress on first African climate change model
	And, New rules needed to facilitate transition to decentralised electricity system The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research is making progress in developing the first Africa-based earth system model to provide reliable projections of the potential impact of climate change on the continent.
	CSIR natural resources and environment executive director May Hermanus: South African Local Government Association president Parks Tau has called for an overhaul of the policy and regulations governing electricity supply in South Africa to facilitate a transition towards a more decentralised electricity system.
	Salga President Parks Tau Sashnee Moodley:
	That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.