Multinational automation company ABB has been selected by the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) to help upgrade and digitalise the electrical grid in the Port Said region, located along Egypt’s Mediterranean coast. The area includes the landmark Suez Canal. The scope of supply includes ABB Ability network manager supervisory control and data acquisition (Scada) and energy management system (EMS), more than 120 remote terminal units (RTUs) and a fibre-optic communications network to monitor and control the grid more efficiently. With growing demand for electricity in an area with an expanding population of more than 12-million people, and rapid urbanisation and economic growth, the comprehensive initiative is part of the country’s efforts to upgrade and modernise its power grid. In addition, Egypt has set ambitious targets for the roll-out and expansion of renewable electricity generation, as well as transmission infrastructure over the next few years. Speaking at the contract signing occasion, Egypt’s Electricity and Renewable Energy Minister Dr Mohamed Shaker highlighted the need to strengthen the power grid and address the growing demand for electricity. The ABB Ability network manager Scada and EMS help to monitor and control the network to ensure high system reliability. The mission-critical communication network, ABB explained in a release on Wednesday, provides a backbone where real-time data from equipment in the field can be quickly and reliably leveraged in the control room, to maximise efficient operations. The order is part of a larger project to upgrade the grid in Egypt and will be handled by a consortium composed of ABB and El Sewedy Electric. “ABB continues to support Egypt’s efforts to upgrade and expand its power grid,” ABB grid automation business head Massimo Daniele commented. The digital transformation in Egypt’s power network will enhance the operations of the Suez Canal and ensure reliable power supply, he elaborated. EETC head engineer Gamal Abdel Rahim, in addition, noted that EETC is increasing the capacity, reliability and efficiency of the national grid in line with the Egypt Vision 2030 for sustainable development. “We are pleased to work with ABB and El Sewedy Electric on this upgrade and digitalisation that will benefit household and industrial consumers in the Suez Canal region,” he added.