Jaguar, in partnership with electric vehicle (EV) charging company GridCars, will install 82 new public charging stations for EVs and plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEVs) in the country’s major hubs, as well as along frequently-travelled holiday routes. The R30-million infrastructure investment should make day-to-day travel, as well as longer day trips and even very long journeys possible for owners of EVs, such as the soon to be introduced Jaguar I-Pace. The I-Pace has a range of up to 470 km on a single charge, depending on driving style and conditions. In addition to the publicly available charging stations to be installed in customer parking areas at every Jaguar Land Rover retailer in South Africa, another 30 public charging stations will be erected at various points of convenience (such as shopping centres) in the country’s major hubs, including Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, East London and Bloemfontein. Jaguar Land Rover South Africa says South Africa’s city centres will now also be connected by the Jaguar Powerway – a series of 22 charging stations along the N3 between Gauteng and Durban and the N1 between Gauteng and Cape Town. Cape Town will also be connected to the Garden Route with a series of charging stations along the N2, all the way to East London.

The majority of charging stations on the public network will be 60 kWh fast chargers, meaning 100 km of range will take around 20 minutes for Jaguar I-Pace owners. A charge from 0% to 80% will take around 72 minutes. Every charging station will also be equipped with a 22 kWh AC fast charger to accommodate PHEVs. The AC standard Type 2 socket will allow charging of all EVs currently available in South Africa. The DC charger is fitted with the CCS DC type socket used by the vast majority of EVs in SA. Jaguar Land Rover owners will use a radio-frequency identity card to activate the charging station and manage electricity billing to the card. Cards can be credited with electronic payments, much like cellphone airtime top-ups. Charging station electricity rates will also be discounted by 25% for all Jaguar Land Rover EV or PHEV owners. Like petrol, the price of electricity fluctuates, but for now the rate for 1 kWh on the card will be between R3 and R3.50, depending where in South Africa it is redeemed. With a 90 kWh battery, a full recharge in an I-Pace will cost between R270 and R315. The entire Jaguar charging grid and Powerway is expected to be operational by the end of November. The Jaguar I-Pace will be available in South Africa in the first quarter of 2019.

“As Jaguar we are proud to be setting the pace for the new generation of electric vehicles in South Africa,” says Jaguar Land Rover South Africa and sub-Sahara Africa MD Richard Gouverneur. “The launch of the Jaguar Powerway demonstrates our commitment to electrification technology and the future of mobility in our market. This new network provides peace of mind to our Jaguar I-Pace customers who can now experience more of their world with less range restrictions.” 