Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula on Monday had a meeting with her Congo-Brazzaville counterpart, Charles Richard Mondjo, who is in Pretoria ahead of the 2018 edition of the Africa Aerospace and Defence [AAD] exhibition which kicks off later this week. "This reciprocal visit, that was agreed upon during my visit in March 2017, takes place two days before the AAD exhibition. This will give you an opportunity to visit various defence companies that will be exhibiting," Mapisa-Nqakula addressed Mondjo during a meeting attended by service chiefs. "Note, Minister, that you are not confined to those companies that will be exhibiting. Attempts will be made for you and your delegation to visit even companies that will not be at the AAD. Allow me to thank you for accepting our invitation to visit South Africa, to [have your visit] coincide with the AAD." Mapisa-Nqakula said Mondjo's visit was "in the letter and spirit of the existing warm relations" between Pretoria and Brazzaville. "This framework was created by our two heads of state, by establishing the joint commission for cooperation, which has met several times. Bilateral defence relations were formalised by means of a defence cooperation agreement that was signed by our two countries," she said. The strategic focus of that agreement is to promote training of military personnel through exchange of trainees, instructors and observers, added Mapisa-Nqakula. For his part, Mondjo said his principal, President Denis Sassou Nguesso, extended warm regards to President Cyril Ramaphosa and the people of South Africa. "I would like to start by requesting you to transmit the salutation of His Excellency Mr Denis Sassou Nguesso to His Excellency Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the Republic of South Africa, to the government and the people of South Africa. That salutation is sent to all South Africans. This is an occasion to renew our admiration to your commitment ... and to reinforce our relationship and cooperation," said Mondjo through an interpreter. "It's also an occasion to be grateful to you for the warm welcome and the good ceremony you did for me." Mondjo was welcomed with a parade by the South African National Defence Force and a gun salute at Defence Headquarters in Pretoria. He will participate at the AAD2018, where hundreds of defence entities will be showcasing their capabilities and armaments at the five-day exhibition. Earlier, Mapisa-Nqakula told journalists that more than 300 exhibitors are set to showcase at the exhibition running from Wednesday until Sunday. She said this year, the organisers expect 35,000 trade visitors and 80,000 general public visitors on the open days. "It is my wish that AAD 2018 will unlock opportunities for the South African defence industry and the aerospace sector in general," she said. The AAD is described by the South African National Defence Force as "the largest defence and aerospace exhibition in Africa and the only one of its kind, boasting the successful format of a combined exhibition of air, sea and land technologies, a static aircraft display and an air show".