The Perdekraal East wind farm, which is situated within the Witzenberg local municipality, in the Western Cape, is preparing for the start of major construction activity. Once complete, the 110 MW Perdekraal wind farm, which spans 3 055 ha, will comprise 48, 115-m-high wind turbines. When operating at full capacity, it will generate around 183 000 MWh/y of clean renewable energy. The 110 MW Perdekraal wind farm is owned by a number of equity members, which include Mainstream Renewable Power, along with a consortium of investors such as the International Finance Corporation and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund. Since achieving financial close in June, the construction team has been working on establishing site infrastructure, the clearing and grubbing of roads and turbine foundations, while also preparing to build the 42 km road on site. While still in the early days of the project, construction project manager Glenn Hobson says the construction team is “gearing up” and expects to have excavated four foundations by the end of September. Seeing the project as an ideal opportunity to further advance the green energy revolution, while contributing to the development of local communities, Hobson explains that South Africa is transitioning towards a renewable future, which facilitates multiple opportunities for growth and development within areas and communities that have lacked infrastructure, investment and sustainable employment opportunities. “It’s also a chance to work towards solving one of the most pressing challenges of our time; reducing the use of fossil fuels and the associated reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions,” he adds. The Perdekraal East wind farm will eliminate about 410 000 t/y of carbon emissions, compared with traditional fossil fuel power plants. In addition to zero carbon emissions and reduced use of fossil fuels, the country will benefit from minimal water consumption during the generation process and significant social and enterprise development programmes, the developers state.