Mercedes-Benz last week unveiled the electric Actros heavy-duty truck. The first eActros was delivered to German logistics company Hermes in September for use under real-life conditions. By the end of this year, Mercedes-Benz will have ten such vehicles on the road with customers. Series production is planned for 2021. The key features of the eActros include eleven battery packs inside and below the chassis, with a usable total capacity of 240 kWh. Drive comes from electric motors close to the wheel hubs. The additional weight of about 2.5 t, compared with a conventional truck, is partly offset by an increase in the permissible gross vehicle weight in the European Union of one ton for trucks with alternative drive systems. The range of the eActros of around 200 km covers a typical day’s work in Europe in the distribution of fresh food to supermarkets. The electric truck will be produced at the Wörth plant, in Germany. South Africa also receives its completely knock-down truck kits, destined for the East London plant, from this facility. The eActros was one of many electric trucks at this year’s international IAA commercial vehicle fair, in Hannover, Germany. In fact, every manufacturer had at least one electric truck on its stand. Mercedes-Benz also used the IAA platform to announce that the new electric Sprinter van will make its debut in 2019, following the launch of the electric Vito this year. The eSprinter will be able to carry a one-ton payload, with 80% of its driving range available after 30 minutes of charging. The electric Citaro city bus, with space for 88 passengers, is ready for delivery next year. A concept fuel cell Sprinter will have a 500 km range. Mercedes-Benz Vans electric drive head Benjamin Keller says the German vehicle manufacturer will work with companies in investigating their route schedules to determine if their operations are suited for the use of electrified vehicles. “Despite our love for alternative drives we have to keep in mind that the electric van will be measured on the same principles as other vans. They have to offer the same industry solutions.” “Emobility will not make sense to everyone,” adds Mercedes-Bens Vans human resources director Wilfried Porth. “Covering very large distances requires very large batteries, which is not feasible at the moment.” In South Africa, Mercedes-Benz Vans South Africa is considering the launch of the electric Vito, says spokesperson Sibusiso Mkwanazi. “We have had requests from parcel, logistics and tourist operators, but keep in mind that the country needs charging infrastructure.” The electric Vito has a range of 150 km. 