JSE-listed real estate investment trust Redefine Properties, together with Abland Property Developers, on Monday unveiled the completed new public road that will improve accessibility to the 1.6-million square kilometer S&J industrial estate, situated along the N3 highway, south of Germiston, in Gauteng. The construction of the Gosforth road extension started during 2017 and was completed on schedule. The R50-million road will be open to the public from the end of September. The greater S&J industrial estate spans 210 ha and caters for a variety of industrial and commercial uses. Redefine national industrial asset manager Johann Nell stated that, with convenient access from and to the N3 and M2 freeways, the estate is suitable for logistics, manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, as well as big box retail. “The opening of the road marks a significant achievement, not only for S&J, but for the greater Germiston and surrounding areas. Roads are the lifelines for development and bring people and businesses together. The new road makes S&J attractive for companies in the logistics and warehousing sectors.” In addition to the investment in road construction, just under R80-million has been allocated for the provision of bulk sewerage, water mains and the necessary substation to facilitate development of the S&J estate. At the estate, the construction of the first precinct guard house is complete with several parcels of land being readied for sale. Current negotiations include the outright sale of land, turnkey development sale, joint venture development deals and bespoke developments for leasing all land totalling in excess of 150 000 m2. “In a regional context, the development brings much-needed job opportunities, during and post construction. It also revitalises the area as it takes formerly under-used land and creates development opportunities which stimulate growth in the area,” said Nell. Jupiter Extension 9, also known as Ganymede Precinct, in extent of 13 ha, is the first phase within the S&J precinct to be released. As part of this precinct’s establishment, a land sale agreement for 53 000 m2 has been concluded, and the property will transfer by the end of this year. Construction on the first two buildings in this precinct, with a combined gross leasable area of 46 500 m2 is planned to start during the last quarter of this year. “S&J will be one of the biggest industrial estates of its kind in Gauteng and South Africa. The new roads will ensure value appreciation in the area and allow businesses convenient access to major freeways,” noted Abland MD Jurgens Prinsloo.