Suspended Eskom group capital executive Abram Masango has been found innocent of the charges of misconduct levelled against him during a disciplinary hearing held over four days in March and April. The disciplinary hearing, which was chaired by Tim Bruinders, was convened to consider disciplinary charges levelled against Masango, which arose from a forensic investigation that was initiated in 2017. The draft forensic report, issued in late January, made allegations of serious misconduct against Masango. Masango was placed on suspension on November 15 last year. He was on suspension when the new board assumed office late in January. The new board swiftly started with the disciplinary process and appointed independent hearing chairperson Bruinders to ensure the serious charges were subjected to a proper enquiry. This approach was in line with the new board’s efforts to ensure that due process is followed when allegations of serious misconduct are levelled against employees, including executives. The approach is also central to the new board’s commitment to rooting out corruption within Eskom and implementing an effective turnaround strategy to restore investor confidence. “Our starting point has never been subjecting any employee to a disciplinary process with a predetermined outcome, but to look at all the allegations with a fresh pair of eyes and ensure that a fair, thorough and independent process is undertaken, which is also in line with any employee’s contract of employment,” said Eskom interim group CE Phakamani Hadebe. When the new board assumed its role, there were seven executives who were facing allegations of corruption or other forms of serious misconduct, Masango being one of them. The board ensured the implicated executives were properly subjected to a full disciplinary process to test the strength of allegations against them and allow them to put up a defence. “Eskom respects the outcome of Masango’s disciplinary process and will negotiate a date for his return to office,” Hadebe concluded.