Groupe des Partenaires pour la Mobilité des Montréalais (PMM), a consortium comprising Alstom and SNC-Lavalin, has signed a contract with infrastructure developer CDPQ Infra to deliver a complete automatic and driverless light metro system for the Réseau Express Metropolitan (REM) project in Montreal, Canada. The consortium will provide rolling stock and signalling, as well as operation and maintenance services. The total contract is worth about £1.8-billion, or about C$2.8-billion, with Alstom’s share estimated at £1.4-billion, or C$2.2-billion, and SNC-Lavalin’s share at £400-million, or about C$600-million. Upon completion, REM will be one of the world’s largest automated transport networks, spanning 67 km, with 26 stations, connecting downtown Montreal to the South Shore, the North Shore, the West Island and Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport. Under the terms of the contract, PMM will supply 212 Alstom Metropolis metrocars (106 two-car trainsets), Alstom’s Urbalis 400 driverless and automated communications-based train control system, Iconis control centre solutions, platform screen doors, WiFi connectivity, and 30 years of operations and maintenance services. Further, PMM is responsible for train and system integration tests and depot equipment supply for train maintenance. The start of commercial service on the first segment of REM is expected in the summer of 2021. PMM’s partners will leverage their long-established local Canadian expertise and international experiences in Vancouver, Ottawa, Singapore, Panama, Dubai and Riyadh, to deliver the REM project. During the construction and the 30-year operations and maintenance period, PMM will create permanent, high-quality, new jobs, notably in areas of automated system experts, rolling stock mechanics, control centre regulators, maintenance operators and control system specialists. In addition, PMM will create jobs for local suppliers that will contribute to the project, not only during the construction period, but also during the 30-year operations and maintenance period. Moreover, the REM project will lead to the establishment of an Alstom global centre of excellence in Montreal for the research and development of integrated systems of control in urban mobility. This centre will bring together about 100 professionals who will be tasked to leverage Montreal’s expertise in advanced digital technologies and artificial intelligence to develop solutions that will be used in Alstom projects globally. Alstom North America senior VP Jérôme Wallut said the company is honoured that CDPQ Infra has chosen PMM for this major public transit infrastructure project that will positively impact mobility in the Greater Montreal area, while creating 250 direct, long-term jobs in Montreal, in Quebec, with peak local employment reaching 350 jobs. “Piloting the project from Montreal, our team understands first-hand the city’s transportation needs and is eager to introduce our latest generation of proven train and signalling solutions that maximise system reliability, performance and capacity, as well as passenger experience.”