From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Power management multinational Eaton South Africa has launched a grid-tied microgrid that uses solar photovoltaic and lithium ion battery storage systems. The microgrid powers its Wadeville campus and factory. Schalk Burger has the story. Schalk Burger: The 375 kVA microgrid includes a 200 kW rooftop solar photovoltaic array and, at its heart, is a lithium ion energy storage system that uses second hand electric car batteries. Eaton Africa operations head Eugén Ranft explains the main features of the system and its importance as a demonstration of microgrid technology. Eaton Africa operations head Eugén Ranft: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: President Cyril Ramaphosa launched the Youth Employment Service initiative last month, a business-led partnership with government, labour and civil society. Marleny Arnoldi tells us more. Marleny Arnoldi: The YES initiative aims to empower one-million South Africans between the ages of 18 and 25 by offering paid, quality work experiences over the next three years. Initiatives like these are critical in aiding the 5.9-million unemployed youths in South Africa. Research finds that one year of work experience, coupled with a CV and reference letter, increases a young person’s chances of finding employment by three times. YES CEO Tashmia Ismail-Saville says YES comes up with solutions that are aligned with the fourth industrial revolution, while considering the challenges that youths have. YES CEO Tashmia Ismail-Saville: Marleny Arnoldi: In addition to traditional job creation, YES also aims to create digital jobs that cater to industries that increasingly demand those skills. It also caters to youths that struggle to find work close to their homes. Ismail-Saville says YES looks at both business and youth needs. YES CEO Tashmia Ismail-Seville: Marleny Arnoldi: Ismail-Seville further explains that helping to decrease unemployment and meeting YES targets should not be intimidating and says everyone privileged enough to be able to contribute, can do so affordably. YES CEO Tashmia Ismail-Seville: Marleny Arnoldi: When corporates do not have the capacity to employ people or if they are not the right fit for the company, the corporations can sponsor employment at a small, medium or microsized enterprise. YES CEO Tashmia Ismail-Seville: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.