Volvo Trucks has introduced its first all-electric truck for commercial use. The FL Electric will be used for urban distribution and refuse operations, among other applications. Sales and series production of the new model will start in Europe next year. The FL Electric is a 16 t gross vehicle weight truck, with a 185 kW electric motor. Max torque is 425 Nm. Energy storage is through two to six lithium-ion batteries, providing a range of up to 300 km. A fast charge will take one to two hours (DC charging), and a night charge up to 10 hours (AC charging), with maximum battery capacity of 300 kWh. The first two Volvo FL Electric trucks will be operated by refuse collection and recycling company Renova and haulage firm TGM. “We’re immensely proud to present the first in a range of fully electrically powered Volvo trucks ready for regular traffic,” says Volvo Trucks president Claes Nilsson. “With this model we are making it possible for cities that aim for sustainable urban development to benefit from the advantages of electrified truck transport.” An electric truck using no fossil fuel and without any exhaust emissions can also be used in indoor terminals and green zones. Their low noise level also creates opportunities for doing more work at night, thus reducing the burden on the roads during the day. An off-peak city distribution project studied the effects of goods transport at night in central Stockholm. By avoiding peak hour traffic the trucks were able to do their jobs in one-third of the time compared with daytime operation. UPTIME IMPORTANT
“In order to make the transition secure and smooth, we will offer holistic solutions based on each customer’s individual needs regarding driving cycles, load capacity, uptime, range and other parameters,” notes Volvo Trucks Volvo FL and Volvo FE product strategy head Jonas Odermalm. “Such a solution may encompass everything from route analysis and battery optimisation, to servicing and financing. Volvo Trucks also works closely with several suppliers of charging equipment. The aim as always is to offer customers high uptime and productivity.” Backing the Volvo Trucks offer is the Volvo Group’s accumulated expertise in electrified transport solutions. Sister company Volvo Buses has sold more than 4 000 hybrid or fully electric buses since 2010. “From experience we know how important it is that cities, energy suppliers and vehicle manufacturers cooperate in order for large-scale electrification to become a reality,” adds Odermalm. “With attractive incentives, agreed standards and a long-term strategy for urban planning and expansion of the charging infrastructure, the process can go much faster.” 