The beauty of the new Porsche 718 Boxter GTS and the 718 Cayman GTS is that you can inch along with the Joburg morning traffic and travel over the occasional speed bump without any problem, or that you can switch to Sport Plus mode, which makes the German gentlemen clear their throats like cigar-smoking welterweight boxers – the classy kind; more of a Manny Pacquiao than a Floyd Mayweather. Sticking to the road like chewing gum to hot tar, you can corner and accelerate like there’s no AARTO, but beware the long, muscled arm of the law. They’ll hear you coming from miles away. Fuel costs for this much fun are fairly reasonable, considering you need fairly deep pockets to buy one of these anyway. (The 718 Caymann GTS retails at R1 122 000 and the Porsche 718 Boxster GTS at R1 137 000.) Combined fuel consumption on both models ranges between 9 l and 8.2 l/100 km. Both mid-engine sports cars are driven by a 2.5 l, four-cylinder turbo flat engine with a redeveloped intake duct and optimised turbocharger, delivering 269 kW of power. Compared with the GTS predecessor model with naturally aspirated engine, up to 26 kW (35 hp) and up to 70 Nm more torque is available. The GTS models feature a six-speed manual transmission for power transmission to the rear axle; alternatively, the Porsche Doppelkupplung (PDK) is also on offer.
 
Depending on the transmission, the maximum torque is 430 Nm with PDK, or 420 Nm with a manual transmission. With the Sport Chrono Package as standard and PDK, the 718 Boxster GTS and 718 Cayman GTS sprint from zero to 100 km/h in 4.1 seconds. Top speed is 290 km/h. The 718 GTS models are equipped as standard with 20-inch Carrera S wheels painted in black (satin finish). The GTS models feature sports seats, with Alcantara leather seat centres.
 
The steering wheel rim, shift lever and armrest are also covered with Alcantara, as is the roof lining in the 718 Cayman GTS. The headrests feature embroidered GTS logos. The infotainment system with touchscreen is operated as easily as a smartphone. The standard Porsche Track Precision app allows automatic recording and detailed display and analysis of driving data on a smartphone. 