From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Diversified sealing and adhesive company Loctite, a division of Henkle South Africa, has launched it’s new range of fast-setting industrial strength adhesives. Paige Muller attended the event. Paige Muller: Loctite’s new hybrid bonders range was introduced to the South African market last month at a product launch held at the premises of Atlas Crane Hire in Germiston. The launch saw Henkle demonstrate the strength and speed of its new range of industrial strength bonders, by performing a vertical 9 ton weight lift using the new Loctite Hybrid (HY) 4070 repair adhesive. Henkle South and sub-saharan Africa Manager Uhtred Eorwine, explained to Engineering News that the new range was developed to satisfy an overwhelming industry need. Henkle South and Sub-saharan Africa manager Uhtred Eorwine: Paige Muller: Eorwine states that the new adhesive range’s ability to quickly and effectively bond multiple substrates, including plastics, metals, ceramics and so forth allows the range to reach beyond traditional adhesive applications and helps overcome tricky industry challenges at affordable prices. Henkle South and Sub-saharan Africa manager Uhtred Eorwine: Paige Muller: Loctite concluded the launch by calling on companies to get in contact with its team, to identify new industrial applications and challenges that the range of adhesives may be able to help overcome. According to Eorwine, the range of adhesives is now available in the South African market through the company’s distributors. Henkle South and Sub-saharan Africa manager Uhtred Eorwine: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines – Extreme inequality in South Africa is constraining growth and investment New analysis by the World Bank has confirmed that South Africa is not only the world’s most unequal country, but that extreme inequality has become a major constraint to higher levels of economic growth, because it is undermining policy certainty and depressing investment. World Bank country director Paul Noumba Um: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.