As part of plans to meet the growing demand for housing in Gauteng, Human Settlements Minister Nomaindiya Mfeketo on Tuesday launched the R300-million Thembelihle Village in Tshwane. Completed in November 2017, with first occupation in February 2018, the project provides safe housing for families in 733 units. Security features include biometric access control, a closed circuit television (CCTV) security system and 24-hour guarding of the premises. With rent for a bachelor apartment starting as low as R700 a month, the project was aimed at providing affordable quality homes to low-income earners nearer their place of work. The Thembelihle Village, which means ‘good hope’, is also located close to government departments, other places of work, shops, social amenities and public transport. Included on the grounds is 1 300 m2 of commercial space, which includes a retail space encompassing a supermarket, butcher, printing shop, laundromat, as well as a nail and hair salon. Social housing landlord Yeast City Housing emphasised the importance of community development and has included, besides others, a soccer academy, health awareness days, extra classes for pupils and karate classes. The complex also features a swimming pool, playgrounds, sports facilities, a community hall, library, as well as lawn areas, which are aimed at creating an “almost park-like atmosphere”. Accompanying Mfeketo at the launch, Gauteng Cooperative Governance, Traditional Affairs and Human Settlements MEC Dikgang Moiloa noted that, especially within a small geographical space, such as Gauteng, projects such as the Thembelihle Village form the foundation upon which the province and stakeholders need to converge and mitigate the housing issue in the province. “This is a great example of what needs to be done to develop human settlements moving forward,” Moiloa added. In addition, Tshwane executive mayor Solly Msimang noted that projects like the Thembelihle Village break the tendency of living far from the city. “This brings people closer to where the opportunities are, without there being the characteristic of dividers of wealth. I am very proud of this project, as this is building homes for people.”