From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Middelburg-based Columbus Stainless aims to remain committed to the growing domestic stainless steel market, while the South African Stainless Steel Development Association (Sassda) believes that 2018 may be the year to break the downward trend of consumption in South Africa. Simone Liedtke tells us more. Simone Liedtke: While a mill like Columbus Stainless has a big entry barrier, CEO Lucien Matthews explains to Engineering News – after a tour of the one-million-ton-a-year plant, that the company is able to compete internationally, while remaining committed to growing the domestic market for stainless steel. Columbus Stainless CEO Lucien Matthews: Simone Liedtke: Commenting on recent political developments across South Africa and its effect on the stainless steel industry, Matthews remains hopeful of a positive effect on both the industry, and the economy at large. Columbus Stainless CEO Lucien Matthews: Simone Liedtke: While Columbus has been around for about 50 years, Matthews says that the company is known for developing and introducing new grades into the market. He further enthused about some of the company’s projects – for clients such as the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa, or Prasa. Columbus Stainless CEO Lucien Matthews: Simone Liedtke: However, Matthews adds that the development of the local community in Middelburg remains a key focus for the company. Education and training, among others, are some of the key themes of their initiatives. Columbus Stainless CEO Lucien Matthews: Simone Liedtke: After having gone through a “rough time”, Matthews further notes that the company has now returned to being profitable. Columbus Stainless CEO Lucien Matthews: Simone Liedtke: A positive sentiment for the industry is further supported by Sassda CEO John Tarboton, who says that the latest member survey shows a possibility of 2018 breaking the downward trend of stainless steel consumption. South African Stainless Steel Development Association (Sassda) CEO John Tarboton: Simone Liedtke: The positive sentiment has, however, not yet translated into an increase of order quantities. South African Stainless Steel Development Association (Sassda) CEO John Tarboton: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.