JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Platinum group metals (PGMs) and chrome co-producer Tharisa Minerals, which on Tuesday forecast a global chrome ore deficit of up to a million tonnes in the short to medium term, on Wednesday published the details of its Vision 2020 growth thrust. The strategic vision targets the delivery of 5.9-million tonnes of run-of-mine (RoM) material a year, 200 000 oz/y of PGMs and two-million tonnes a year of chrome concentrates by 2020 – a significant increase to the JSE-listed record 2017 financial year output of five-million tonnes of RoM, 143 600 oz of PGMs and 1.3-million tonnes of chrome concentrates. “Tharisa is entering an exciting growth phase,” CEO Phoevos Pouroulis told Creamer Media’s Mining Weekly Online in the release. Higher feed grades from improved mining, combined with two optimisation projects and two new processing plants, are poised to add 61 800 oz/y of PGMs and 602 000 t/y of chrome concentrate by 2020, taking production to 200 000 oz/y of PGMs and two-million tonnes yearly of chrome concentrates. The two optimisation projects involve a combined capital outlay of R160-million and the two new plants under evaluation a combined R600-million, taking potential combined capital expenditure to R760-million. The first of the two optimisation projects involves upgrading the crusher of the Genesis plant at the Tharisa mine in Marikana, North West, which was visited on Tuesday by local and foreign media that included Creamer Media's Mining Weekly Online. The crusher upgrade is aimed at increasing throughput by 15% or 180 000 t/y, with a potential increase in premium-priced chemical grade chrome concentrate and foundry grade chrome concentrate production of 24 000 t/y and 18 000 t/y. This project is scheduled to be commissioned in July at an expected capital cost of R90-million ($7.5-million). Operating costs are estimated at R10/t ($83 c/t), with a less than 12 months payback. The second of the optimisation projects is at the Voyager plant, where additional flash flotation and a scavenger plant with high energy mechanisms will target better PGM recoveries and increasing PGM production by 14 000 oz/y. This project is expected to be commissioned in October at an expected capital cost of R70-million ($5.8-million); operating costs are at a likely negligible level and payback again less than 12 months. “What’s required now is real capital investment in mining operations and proper processing plants,” Pouroulis said of the company's response to the forecast chrome ore deficit. Vision 2020 takes in evaluation of the feasibility of the building of two new plants costing R300-million each. The first of these, the Vulcan plant, will facilitate additional recovery of fine chrome from tailings streams. The proprietary process is being developed by Tharisa and a demonstration plant is being constructed. The feasibility study and process design will be undertaken in conjunction with the operation of the pilot plant. The full-scale Vulcan plant is expected to be commissioned in October 2019, with projected chrome concentrate production of 380 000 t/y. Operating costs are estimated at R50/t ($4.16/t). The second of the new plants, the Apollo plant, will be designed and built as an independent integrated PGM and chrome plant that will process upper group one (UG1) reef and MG RoM. It will be designed in two phases, the first phase treating 50 000 t a month and the second phase doubling that capacity. The feasibility study is being conducted and testwork and resource estimation are in progress. Plant construction will take 12 months, with commissioning planned for March 2020. Apollo is expected to produce 6 000 oz/y of PGMs and 180 000 t/y of chrome concentrates, with operating costs, including mining, estimated at R225/t ($18.8/t). Both the Vulcan and Apollo plants are subject to feasibility studies and, if approved, will be funded through a combination of cash flows and drawdown from debt facilities. The strong demand for chrome ore is being driven by 3% to 5% yearly growth in stainless steel production, for which chrome ore is fundamental with 4 t of stainless steel requiring 2.5 t of chrome ore, which turns into 1 t of ferrochrome. China currently produces and consumes more than half of the world's stainless steel and Chinese ferrochrome capacity is poised to increase by a million tonnes this year, some of it replacement tonnes as older furnaces give way to new environmentally friendlier furnaces. "So, in the next 24 months, we see up to a million tonnes of chrome ore deficit,” Pouroulis told a local and foreign media contingent, which included Creamer Media’s Mining Weekly Online. Current financial year guidance remains at five-million tonnes of RoM, 150 000 oz of PGMs and 1.4-milllion tonnes of chrome concentrates, of which 350 000 t will be specialty grade chrome concentrates that fetch prices higher than metallurgical chrome. Speaking at Tharisa's large 17-year-life opencast PGM and chrome mine, Pouroulis said of the looming chrome ore supply shortfall: “It’s going to be quite interesting to see how the market reacts to that, and what the supply-side response will be to higher prices.” When prices hit $390/t last year, there was a strong supply-side response from South Africa, Turkey, Oman, Pakistan and even Brazil, with some liquidating historical stockpiles and seizing quick entry opportunities. These are facilitated by the chrome ore market having lower barriers to entry than PGMs, primarily because of China's ability to absorb multiple grades of feedstock. Tharisa Minerals COO Michelle Taylor put $200/t as the sustainable price for metallurgical grade chrome, while emphasising that just as Tharisa has a basket of PGM metals, it also has a basket of chrome commodities, made up of 75% metallurgical chrome and 25% specialty grade chrome, with chemical grade chrome attracting at least $50/t more than the metallurgical grade product. Tharisa also produces foundry grade chrome concentrate, which again attracts a healthy premium; current pricing is $600/t, up on last year’s $500/t to $550/t. Importantly, Tharisa is producing more specialty grade concentrate. South Africa, as Taylor pointed out at last year’s Chromium 2017 in Johannesburg, is an irreplaceable global supplier of chrome ore and ferrochrome, which is, in turn, an irreplaceable component of China-dominated stainless steel production. As the dominant global chrome ore producer, South Africa in 2016 delivered half of the world’s production of chrome ore. South Africa then used half of the chrome it produced as feedstock for domestic ferrochrome production and exported the remaining 8.5-million tonnes, overwhelmingly to China. Seventy-three per cent of China’s chrome imports come from South Africa’s chrome-mining industry, which employs 17 500 people who receive R4.2-billion a year in salaries and wages. However, in ferrochrome, South Africa has been forced, through mainly negative Eskom-induced power factors, to cede its one-time No 1 global position to China, which in 2016 produced 43% of world ferrochrome output compared with South Africa’s 33% of world output. Tharisa received its first mining rights in 2008, the year of the global financial crisis and the Eskom electricity crisis, which threw the mine feasibility study on its head, prompting the creation of the current low-cost high-value integrated processing unit of PGM-and-chrome concentrates, which is standing it in good stead.