Mercedes-Benz South Africa (MBSA) on Wednesday produced its first Mercedes-AMG C 63 S at the East London plant, in the Eastern
	Cape, following a R200-million investment to allow for the assembly of three Mercedes-AMG models for the export and local markets. MBSA announced last year that it would introduce the Mercedes-AMG C 43 4 MATIC, Mercedes-AMG C 63 and Mercedes-AMG C 63 S to the local
	assembly line. Production of the Mercedes-AMG C 63 also started on Wednesday. Assembly of the Mercedes C 43 4 MATIC started in July last year. MBSA exported more than 1 700 Mercedes-AMG C 43 units last year. AMG models refer to Mercedes-Benz’s range of high-specification performance vehicles. The newcomers mean that the East London plant has the capacity to produce ten C-model derivatives. The AMG investment adds to C-Class sedan and C 350 e plug-in hybrid assembly at the plant. MBSA said that the integration of the three new models happened smoothly, and with “absolute minimal interruption to the current production at the East London plant”. “The production of the first Mercedes AMG C 63 unit here in East London, sees another exciting model added to our current C-Class family and further affirms the status of our plant as a key player in the Daimler global network,” says MBSA CEO and manufacturing executive director Andreas Engling. “The distinct sportiness and power of the AMG brand is well recognised globally, and we are proud that the C 63 model will be exported from our shores to customers all around the world.
	
	“Following the launch of the Mercedes-AMG C 43 model in 2017, the first production unit of the flagship C 63 model is another great success for our plant, and is testament to the hard work and dedication of our employees who continue to build world-class products at Mercedes-Benz South Africa.”
	
	The introduction of the three AMG models into the MBSA production line required a number of new infrastructure and technological innovations at the plant. These included modifications and additional devices at various stations, specifically in the engine and trim assembly lines.