Subaru South Africa (SA) sales increased by 10% last year, reaching 1 002 units, outgunning a lethargic domestic market that managed only a 1.9% gain in 2017 compared with 2016. Subaru has been operating in South Africa for more than twenty-five years. “We have received a lot of scrutiny and questions from the media over our sustainability in this market given the tough economy and the recent departure of some other automotive brands,” says Subaru SA retail GM Morne Viviers. “[A number of] new dealerships, as well as our sales success should put aside any doubt that we are here to stay and that we are here to excel at bringing confidence in motion to more South Africans. “Subaru is building products that are reliable, full of character, daring for adventure and incredibly safe. Consumers need this sort of dependability and confidence and that’s why they continue to choose Subaru and remain so very loyal.” Subaru SA opened Subaru Durban in the last quarter of 2017, under the new management of the Emond Auto Group. Complementing the company’s Western Cape representation and adding to the dealerships in Somerset West and Table View, the Thorp Motor Group opened a new dealership in Plumstead, Cape Town. Additionally, the Thorp Motor Group took control of Subaru Table View as the new owner. Four new dealership are set to open in Gauteng this year. The first is Subaru East Rand, which opens in February, under the banner of Combined Motor Holdings (CMH). Subaru Silver Lakes, in Pretoria, will be followed by Subaru West Rand and Subaru South Rand. Last year saw the launch of the new Subaru Impreza and Subaru XV models. In February, Subaru SA will launch the updated Subaru Legacy executive sedan and the updated Subaru Outback crossover. Global sales of the Japanese manufacturer increased by 5% in 2017 compared with 2016, to 1.06-million units. Sales are expected to increase by 2% in 2018, to 1.08-million units. This will mark a calendar sales year record for Subaru for the seventh consecutive year. While there was healthy growth in almost all markets in 2017, China saw a 34% decline in Subaru sales. Subaru was the world’s twenty-third biggest vehicle manufacturer by volume in 2016, roughly the same size as Tata and Mitsubishi.