As the Small Business Institute (SBI) reconstitutes its board of directors after adopting a new memorandum of incorporation, a new approach, centred on small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) research, is set to be adopted. The new board members, led by chairperson Bernard Swanepoel, will each be responsible for a specific portfolio, with several areas of research exploring the impediments to SME development planned for this year. The most significant of these areas will be a rigorous three-phase baseline study on the small business segment of the economy, according to Swanepoel. “South Africa is woefully lacking in authoritative research about SMEs,” he said. Partnered with independent private sector development and research company SBP, SBI’s baseline study, to be completed by year-end, will capture the size, nature and characteristics of small firms operating in South Africa. “It’s ludicrous that we make assumptions about how many [small firms] we have, let alone pile more laws and regulations on top of the sector most likely to create jobs in this country. We need to understand whether the decisions and activities by government and big business help or hinder SMEs to start, run and grow.” SBI will also undertake research on the operating environment, red-tape and the supply of finance. “The evidence we collect and promote at Business Unity South Africa’s table and through our five Indabas planned, as well as township town hall meetings around the country, will underscore our claim to be the big voice for small business,” said Swanepoel. Sipho Nkosi has been appointed vice chairperson and vice president. The new board of directors comprises Ashwin Willemse, who is responsible for the entrepreneurship and youth portfolio; Chris Darroll, allocated the research and advocacy (alternate) portfolio; Ernest Messina, who will focus on corporate relationships; and Hettienne von Abo-Moolman, who was tasked with sectoral coordination. Ivan Pillay has been appointed to the government liaison portfolio; Jennifer Cohen to research and advocacy; Joe Mwase as Busa liaison; Octavia Matloa to finance and governance; Siki Mgabadeli to communications; Winda Austin-Loeve as president and chamber liaison and Yolisa Pikie as government liaison (alternate).