Haval Motors South Africa (HMSA) seems to have tapped into South Africa’s love of sports-utility vehicles (SUVs), with the Chinese brand on the comeback trail following a shake-up in ownership. Great Wall Motors South Africa (GWM SA) was launched as an independent importer in 2007. GWM in China assumed 100% control of the local company in 2016, relaunching it as HMSA. Haval is GWM’s premium SUV brand. GWM is China’s largest privately owned automotive manufacturer. Last year’s relaunch saw the return of the well-known GWM bakkies to South Africa, as well as the GWM M4 crossover, with the addition of a range of affordable Haval SUVs. GWM SA sales in the first six months of 2016 reached 703 units – according to aggregate numbers reported to the Department of Trade and Industry. HMSA sales in the last six months of 2017 reached 1 444 units. This is closer to GWM SA’s historic reported sales, before the importer ran into trouble. In the last six months of 2014, GWM SA sales reached 1 885 units. “There were many aspects that played a part in the increase in sales [seen in 2017], the first one being the fact that HMSA took full control of GWM SA,” says HMSA national sales manager Tyrone Alberts. “HMSA is now a wholly owned subsidiary of GWM China, and we are confident that Haval will become a major player in this segment in the South African market. “HMSA is in South Africa to stay. Haval and GWM China are most certainly in it for the long haul. There has been a tremendous investment from Haval and GWM China into the South African market and we know that we will reap the rewards in the future.” Alberts says Haval Motors has a strategic plan to build both the Haval and GWM brands by increasing brand awareness and customer satisfaction. “Our products are remarkable and we offer our consumers a value for money proposition in our value-starved market, along with the customer service that consumers deserve.” HMSA already has the Haval H1, H2, H6 and H6 C available on the local market, and will launch the Haval H9 in 2018. This year will also see an upgrade to the GWM Steed 5 pick-up.
	 
	HMSA cur rently has 37 dealers, of which 23 sell boththe Haval and GWM brands. The remainder sells only the GWM brand. “Our objective for 2018 is to have 34 full Haval dealers and to continue with gradual growth in 2019,” says Alberts. The perception ar ound Chinese brands in South Africa is changingrapidly, he adds. “Consumers are well educated and can now see that the quality and workmanship coming out of China is right up to standard with
	the best in the world. We will separate ourselves from the rest [of the brands in SouthA frica] by offering safe, remarkable products with great customer
	service at an affordable price.” Local Assembly
	HMSA in the “process of undertaking a feas ibility study into a localassembly plant in South Africa”, says Alberts. “Although nothing is set in stone as yet, I am confident there will be a positive outcome.” Alberts says he can also confirm that HMSA will be expanding into Africa in the foreseeable future. “We will be using South Africa as the hub for Haval and GWM – forboth vehicle and parts distribution into other African countries.”