South Africa's Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa will hold bilateral meetings with a range of world leaders, including British Prime Minister Theresa May and Danish Prime Minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen, at the World Economic Forum on Thursday, as the country continues its drive to assure partner governments, investors and finance institutions that it is stable. A statement from the Presidency said that the bilaterals with May and Rasmussen will take place on Team South Africa's final day at WEF in Davos, Switzerland. "The South African delegation to the World Economic Forum 2018 (WEF) in Davos Switzerland, has been assuring partner governments, investors and finance institutions that South Africa is politically stable, that the country is improving governance of state-owned enterprises and that investment opportunities are plentiful," the statement added. The presidency said the meetings with the world leaders, including that of the Netherlands, is part of a drive to forge partnerships between South Africa and the international community that will be "mutually beneficial and will contribute to the resolution of issues facing the global community". Ramaphosa on Wednesday met with African Union Chair and Guinean President Alpha Condé and President Emmerson Mnangagwa of Zimbabwe, and was also scheduled to meet Mauritian President Ameenah Gurib-Fakim. It added that Ramaphosa had participated in a WEF session on Peacebuilding in Africa where Condé delivered the opening remarks, while President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, with whom Ramaphosa has also held discussions at WEF, closed the session. Ramaphosa and a ministerial delegation comprising the Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, International Relations and Cooperation, Trade and Industry; Economic Development, Finance and Public Works portfolios, and Reserve Bank Governor Lesetja Kganyago, further participated in a WEF Country Dialogue on South Africa where government leaders assured investors that the country was undergoing renewal and reform that would open new opportunities for locals and international partners alike. "South Africa's Ministerial delegation has participated actively in a range of discussion platforms and bilateral meetings with international public and private sector leadership who have existing interests in or are exploring new opportunities in South Africa as a leading emerging market," the presidency added. Ramaphosa, on Wednesday night, also addressed a South Africa Business Dinner hosted by Brand South Africa, where he spoke on the WEF conference theme of "Creating a Shared Future in a Fractured World". He pointed out that while many countries had benefited tremendously from globalisation, which has been characterised by free trade and investment and further reinforced by rapid technological development, this impact has been uneven.