
	The Western Cape Industrial Symbiosis Programme (WISP) is recruiting candidates for an enterprise development programme that will result in the establishment of businesses in the province to make use of certain waste streams to create new products. 
	Through the programme, WISP aims to divert waste from landfill, boost the green economy and create new jobs. 
	It has enlisted the South African Renewable Energy Business Incubator (Sarebi) to implement the initiative. 
	Sarebi works with entrepreneurs who are trying to establish or grow small and medium-sized businesses by offering business support and applying appropriate business development interventions. 
	WISP has, through industry engagements, identified 15 waste streams that could potentially yield new business opportunities for small businesses. These waste streams include wood; wastewater; construction and demolition waste; foundry sand; glass; plastic polyvinyl chloride; organics; cardboard cores; composite plastic car bumpers; oily rags; rockwool; rubber crumb and dust; paint sludge polyurethane and wet blue leather skins and offcuts. 
	The waste streams identified are typically not taken up by large companies and this creates a diversion and recycling opportunity for smaller entrepreneurs and enterprises. 
	The sources of these waste materials are known and an estimation of the quantity available is provided. The challenge for the entrepreneur is to determine what technology and process should be applied to create a value-added product from the waste stream. 
	Sarebi will recruit suitable entrepreneurs to take on the challenge. 
	Successful applicants will have the opportunity of going through a comprehensive business development course that includes developing a business plan. They will also receive mentoring and operational support. 
	Successful candidates have to have the technical capacity to run a business in the waste and/or energy sector; be an entrepreneur with an aptitude for running a business; and qualify as either a new business start-up, exempted microenterprise or qualifying small enterprise. 
	Successful candidates will be selected to join the masterclass and pre-incubation programme at Sarebi, which will run over a five-month period starting in May. 
	As part of the masterclass and pre-incubation programmes, business owners will work with a team of experienced people who will assist them with setting up and/or enhancing their businesses. They will also receive formal training on various aspects of running a successful business, as well as have access to a business coach for the duration of the programme. 
	To apply, candidates need to fill in an online form by February 16. A briefing day will be held on February 6 to present the business opportunities and incubation programme in more detail. 