South African Airways (SAA) and Emirates are expanding their commercial relationship with enhancements to a codeshare agreement, opening up new destinations for customers of both airlines. SAA CEO Vuyani Jarana said on Tuesday that the expansion of the commercial relationship with the world’s largest international airline group would strengthen key focus areas of the implementation of a turnaround plan for the cash-strapped carrier. SAA, which has not generated a profit since 2011 and survives on State guarantees, has drawn up a turnaround plan that involves cutting jobs and routes to turn the business around by 2021. As part of the implementation of the turnaround plan, the airline has been on roadshows to meet its major codeshare partners to revitalise the commercial delivery under existing agreements. The expanded codeshare agreement with Emirates builds on the agreement signed in 1997, whereby the SAA code started to appear on flights operated by Emirates to Dubai. Emirates president Tim Clark affirmed in a statement that the airline remained “deeply committed” to its long relationship with SAA. “We have seen great success with the codeshare agreement, having enabled greater connectivity to both SAA and Emirates customers, by offering more choice, flexibility and ease of connections to a wide range of cities via Dubai and across more points in southern Africa.” In 2017/18, the codeshare agreement between SAA and Emirates saw about 90 000 passengers benefit from seamless travel and greater connectivity, allowing SAA to offer its customers seats on the eight daily flights operated by Emirates between South Africa and Dubai. The enhanced agreement means the codeshare will be expanded across both carriers’ networks, a joint media statement explained. Included in the new agreement are plans to enhance the frequent flyer programmes, SAA’s Voyager and Emirates’ Skywards programme.  Emirates became a Voyager airline partner in 2000, which means Voyager members are able to earn and redeem miles on flights operated by Emirates, and similarly, Skywards members are able to earn and redeem Miles on SAA-operated flights.