The Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA) has officially launched government’s e-Recruitment system, which enables job seekers to apply for positions in the public service through an online platform. The system was launched by Public Service and Administration Minister Ayanda Dlodlo, in Pretoria, on Wednesday, and was accompanied by a live demonstration of the system. The new e-Recruitment system is Web-based and accessible from different locations for all job seekers. Currently, the e-Recruitment system or applications through the digital Z83 system are being phased-in, beginning with the departments of Labour, Higher Education and Training and Public Service and Administration, as well as the Office of the Public Service Commission, the National School of Government and the Centre for Public Service Innovation, with the process expected to be completed by March 31, 2019. Government will then roll out the system to the rest of the public service from April 1, 2019. Users of the system will be required to create a profile using their identity number as a username, as this is both unique and verified. They can then view available positions in the public service, including a list of requirements and a job description; and can apply for relevant positions. Applicants will submit applications to a centralised database. This will enable them to post their curriculum vitae and supporting documents once, thereby negating the effort and cost of making multiple copies for applications. The process will also include a review of regulations for all entry-level posts in the public service, to allow for the recruitment of new entrants without prior experience into entry-level jobs. Notably, the government will still accept applications for jobs in the public service through the physical Z83 forms, to accommodate those who do not have access to the Internet. “The e-Recruitment system is [the] beginning of a process to introduce a paperless administration across the public service. Last month, I directed the DPSA to introduce a digital Z83 application form as an additional platform for job seekers in the public service,” said Dlodlo. Moreover, she noted that the decision to create a digital Z83 form is a direct response to job-seekers in South Africa, who, across various platforms, including social media, have informed government that the Z83 application process is cumbersome and unaffordable. “A benefit for government departments is that the system allows them to advertise posts electronically and, therefore, reduces the cost of current methods of advertising in newspapers.” The e-Recruitment system is a collaborative effort between the DPSA and the Gauteng Department of e-Government. The latter provides the required resources to operate the system, while the State Information Technology Agency is partnering on the provision of technical and infrastructure development skills. This system forms part of the government’s process to simplify the application process in the sector, especially for the youth, thereby enhancing job opportunities. “Through the launch of e-Recruitment, as government, we demonstrate our commitment to uplifting the lives of our people, especially the youth and graduates.”