The International Air Transport Association (Iata) has launched its Turbulence Aware data resource, which aims to assist airlines avoid turbulence, by augmenting the airlines’ ability to pre-empt turbulence by pooling and sharing real-time data, Iata meteorological programme head Katya Vashchankova told Iata Media Day attendees on Wednesday. She explained that turbulence was the leading cause of nonfatal accidents and injuries to cabin crew and passengers and that it cost airlines millions of dollars a year owing to in-flight diversions as a result of injury, damaged aircraft interiors and excessive fuel burn. Currently, airlines rely on pilot reports and weather advisories to mitigate the impact of turbulence on their operations. While effective, the current methods have limitations owing to the fragmentation of data sources and inconsistencies in the scope and quality of the data, owing to the subjectivity in observations. Vaschankova explained that weather radar is used for turbulence avoidance related to thunderstorms but cannot detect clear air turbulence, while aircraft size and pilot experience tend to skew any data provided by pilot reports. Further, while several airlines employ turbulence reporting products, they do not have access to data generated by other airline’s data, which leaves gaps in the available information. Turbulence Aware collects and consolidates data from multiple contributing airlines. The single, objective anonymised database is accessible to participants, who gain actionable real-time turbulence information. Iata will act as a global data consolidator. The association partnered with UK software firm Snowflake to build the platform and provide access to airlines, integrating the information into their existing flight planning and in-flight tools. The software is available to all airlines to enable as much participation as possible. Use of the platform requires no additional equipment installation. Data can also be graphically displayed in the Iata Turbulence Aware Web-based viewer. Iata DG and CEO Alexandre de Juniac noted that the challenge of managing turbulence would grow as a result of climate change, but that the associated safety and efficiency implications could be mitigated by the new platform. Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and Aer Lingus have already signed contracts to participate in the project and Delta is already contributing its data to the Turbulence Aware platform. Vaschankova noted that the first operational version of the platform was completed earlier this month. Trials will be conducted throughout 2019 and the full launch is expected in January 2020. *Nadine James is a guest of Iata at the 2018 Media Day.