Residents in water-scarce areas of the country need to recognise and adjust to the water supply limitations, especially those in drought-stricken areas, the water and sanitation department said on Sunday. The department was continuing its endeavours to ensure security of the supply of water for the country, and more particularly for the currently drought-stricken Western Cape, spokesman Sputnik Ratau said. "The current drought being experienced in the Western Cape is a cause of concern for the department and is receiving requisite attention," he said. The department was currently helping with drilling into the Table Mountain Group Aquifer (TMG) as part of the efforts to alleviate the water scarcity in the area. There was also a plan underway to access the 10% of water still in the Theewaterskloof Dam to increase capacity in the Western Cape Water Supply System (WCWSS). The media was recently able to see the drilling as it was happening, "with the hydrologists indicating a form of satisfaction with the artesian flow being reached", Ratau said. Drilling started on February 10, with the current drilling having intruded various formations of sandstone and shale-like material after which reaching a hard rock formation at 28 metres. The depth of water strikes were at 39 metres and 46 metres. A preliminary blow yield was conducted at a depth of 55 metres which yield was measured at one litre per second. The drilling on February 22 was at a depth of 84 metres. "The ultimate desired depth of 250 metres is being looked at," he said. The department was also working at accessing the 10% of water still available in the Theewaterskloof Dam as a further means of augmenting the WCWSS. "Recognising and adjusting to the water supply limitations is an essential part of the adaptation process that residents located in the water-scarce areas, especially those that are drought stricken, need to engage in," Ratau said. The department urged all citizens to practice strict water saving methods and to adhere to the water restrictions imposed in their respective areas, especially the City of Cape Town. Citizens were also urged to report to the police any acts that interfered with distribution of water, such as vandalism and theft of water infrastructure, water pollution, and unauthorised use of water. "Ensuring water security is a responsibility of all water users and requires a collaborative effort," Ratau said.