Construction has started on the new Southern African offices of global professional services company Accenture, which will be relocating from its current offices in Woodmead to a 3 875 m² facility, in Waterfall City, in December, as part of its Africa expansion strategy.
	
	Waterfall commercial developers Attacq partnered with accomplished property developers Zenprop to bring the innovative new Accenture office to Waterfall. In this building, Accenture has endorsed the application of the very best in sustainability and urban design principles, adapted and attuned to the "changing needs of a continent on the move." "Waterfall is increasingly becoming the hub of consulting and professional firms in Gauteng. As we continue to grow and develop the Waterfall precinct, it is heartening to see that such top calibre companies share and endorse our vision. We are on an ambitious and industry-leading journey of informed urban evolution and it is exciting to see how many high-profile organisations are eager to be part of it," Attacq interim CEO Melt Hamman commented on Thursday. He further extended a warm welcome to Accenture and noted that Attacq was "thrilled" that Accenture has decided to make its new home at Waterfall City.
	
	Waterfall City - South Africa's largest urban concept development - is designed to provide everything expected of a world-class, modern city, he noted. Its central location in relation to Pretoria and Johannesburg, as well as its proximity to major highways, transport nodes and the Gautrain station, makes it a suitable location for businesses looking for secure and accessible working premises in a premier-quality urban environment, Hamman added. "Zenprop has an established relationship with Attacq in Waterfall, partnering on the construction of projects such as the Cummins regional offices. We have already worked together in delivering a sustainable and environment-friendly building in the Waterfall Logistics Hub and we are pleased to be involved on another project in the precinct," Zenprop CEO James Tannenberger added.
	
	Accenture's commitment to technological advancement and innovation as driving tools for growth and development mirrors Attacq's own commitment to leveraging technology to usher in a new era of modern African cities, the company stated.