Eskom's head of generation Matshela Koko on Wednesday, confirmed that he was suspended from South Africa's power utility. "I have since this evening received a confirmation of my suspension from Eskom. I have been served with new charges. I welcome these developments and once again look forward to clearing my name in a tribunal," he wrote on social media Twitter. Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe confirmed the suspension but said the power utility would release a statement on Thursday. This was the second suspension at the power utility. Earlier on Wednesday, Phasiwe confirmed the suspension of Eskom's chief information officer. "NOTICE: Eskom's Chief Information Officer, Sean Maritz, has been suspended pending an investigation into allegations of impropriety. He was placed on temporary suspension last Friday, which has now been converted into a permanent suspension," he wrote on Twitter. On January 3, Eskom confirmed that Koko and former acting group executive for group capital, Prish Govender, have been reinstated after they were cleared in disciplinary hearings. At the time, Phasiwe said that the disciplinary hearings for the executives had been transparent and fair. Phasiwe said after the hearing was completed, the chairperson of the hearing gave the report to the board of Eskom on 15 December after which they read it and informed the minister of public enterprises that they should make this information public. Koko was facing six charges, among others, for allegedly failing to declare a conflict of interest after a company in which his stepdaughter had shares, Impulse International, was awarded a R1-billion tender by a division he led when he was group executive for generation. "In December 2017, the Eskom Board received the final report from the chairperson of the disciplinary case involving suspended Eskom Group Executive for Generation, Mr Matshela Koko. The report found Mr Koko not guilty of any wrongdoing and he has now been reinstated to his position with effect from 02 January 2018," Phasiwe said at the time. "The senior counsel investigating allegations of impropriety in the McKinsey/Trillian matter has also cleared Mr Prish Govender and he has thus also been reinstated to his position as the acting Group Executive for Group Capital. The investigation found that there was nothing untoward he had done on his part, but if there are any aggrieved parties or individuals or [they] may have other information that the board may not have had at a time, they can bring it forward." Eskom has since made demands to recover the more than R1.5-billion it had unlawfully paid to McKinsey and Trillian without contracts. Last month, the DA filed criminal charges against Koko for alleged breach of the Public Finance Management Act.