Deputy President and African National Congress (ANC) president Cyril Ramaphosa on Wednesday released a statement in response to the country’s apparent anxiety around the removal of Jacob Zuma as State President. Ramaphosa and Zuma had met for discussions about the sitting President’s “transition” this morning following what were termed “fruitful discussions” when the two met last night. The State of the Nation Address (Sona), which was scheduled to take place on Thursday, was postponed by Parliament’s presiding officers on Tuesday, to allow for these consultations. Ramaphosa acknowledged South Africans’ concerns about the uncertainty surrounding Zuma’s removal.
	
	Wednesday’s meeting between the President and his Deputy involved “direct discussions on the transition” and matters relating to Zuma’s position as President. The discussions were termed “constructive” and Ramaphosa believes it will ensure a swift outcome of the matter, which he says are in the interests of the country. A special meeting of the ANC’s National Executive Committee on Wednesday was postponed yesterday to allow Zuma and Ramaphosa to settle discussions and report back to the ANC and the country in the coming days.
	
	“I am certain that the process we have now embarked on will achieve an outcome that not only addresses these concerns, but also unites our people around the tasks that all of us must necessarily undertake to build our country. We will be able to communicate further on President Zuma’s position as President of the Republic once we have finalised all pertinent matters,” he said. However, while Sona would be postponed until further notice, all activities of government and parliament would continue. Ramaphosa pointed out that he was directed by the interests and needs of South Africans, which were paramount. “This is a challenging time for our country. Both President Zuma and myself are aware that our people want and deserve closure. The constructive process we have embarked on offers the greatest opportunity to conclude this matter without discord or division,” Ramaphosa concluded.