Local shipbuilder Damen Shipyards Cape Town (DSCT), part of the global Netherlands-based Damen Group, announced on Monday that it had received an order to build three inshore patrol vessels (IPVs) for the South African Navy (SAN). The order was placed by South African defence acquisitions, disposals and research and development agency Armscor. “We are very happy to receive this order and are looking forward to this continuation of our long-standing relationship with the South African Navy,” affirmed DSCT chairperson Sam Montsi. The order forms part of the SAN’s Project Biro to acquire new offshore and inshore patrol vessels. The order was placed exactly four years after the shipyard received a previous order for the SAN, for two tugs, under project Canter. Each IPV will have a length of 62 m and a beam of 11 m. The three IPVs will employ Damen’s patented Sea Axe hull design and they will be the first vessels of this type to operate in South Africa. The design is so-called because it features a straight-edged, axe-shaped bow. The company describes the Sea Axe as “revolutionary” and providing “exceptional seakeeping behaviour. … [F]or improved safety and comfort on board and significantly reduced fuel consumption and emissions”. “At DCST we are not only about shipbuilding and repair, but also about providing people with the opportunities they need to reach their potential – whether they work for us or one of our many local suppliers – and supporting the country’s economy,” he stated. “DSCT is about the development of an entire shipbuilding and related industries [sic].” The company is committed to the South African government’s Operation Phakisa, to develop the country’s maritime industry. Consequently, it will source as many as possible of the inputs (components and services) for construction of the IPVs from local suppliers. The company will also actively participate in the country’s Defence Industrial Participation and National Industrial Participation programmes. These will contribute to the government’s broad-based black economic empowerment (BBBEE) programme. DSCT itself is a Level-3 BBBEE company.