Isuzu Motors South Africa (IMSA) on Friday not only launched its standalone business at its manufacturing plant in Struandale, Port Elizabeth – apart from the General Motors brand, following the latter’s exit from South Africa last year –  but also showcased its new bakkie-derived sports utility vehicle (SUV), the seven-seater mu-X, for the first time. Speaking at the launch, IMSA technical services executive Dominic Rimmer said the company did extensive market research prior to bringing the vehicle to South Africa. Its steering power, fuel economy and entertainment offerings are some of the standout features of the vehicle. “The m-UX ticks these boxes. [It will] be a class leader in fuel economy,” said Rimmer. The Isuzu mu-X was first introduced to the market in Thailand in 2013 and is currently sold in Australia and the Philippines, where it holds the market leader status. “We are excited about the addition of the mu-X into the Isuzu portfolio, offering customers an SUV originating from a strong brand that is trusted and known for reliability by South Africans,” said Rimmer. The mu-X will be powered by a three-litre engine and comes standard with safety features, such as an anti-brake system and electronic brake system, extrasensory perception and traction control. It will also be available in 2x4 and 4x4 configurations. The SUV is further supported by a five-link rear suspension. ISUZU PLANT
	Last year, the car manufacturer announced that it would buy the light commercial vehicle operations in Port Elizabeth and also the balance of shareholding in its Isuzu Trucks South Africa operations from General Motors South Africa. Also speaking at the event, Isuzu Motors of Japan president Masanori Katayama said the company was committed to growing its business in South Africa. “This is the first commercial and light commercial vehicle manufacturing operation outside of Japan in which we have acquired a 100% ownership. We are represented in 30 countries outside of Japan and successfully operate 47 manufacturing plants in these countries with joint venture partners.” “Our decision with regards to South Africa demonstrates the confidence we have in this market and also is indicative of our longer-term view that South Africa will serve as an important base for our future growth on the African continent.” Isuzu is making positive strides in Africa and, a year ago, the company acquired a 57.7% majority shareholding in the Kenyan truck and bus assembly operation which supplies Isuzu vehicles to East African markets, while commanding a leading 34% share of the Kenyan new-vehicle market. Isuzu also has a 20% shareholding in joint venture manufacturing operations in Egypt, where the company has led in the market for ten years in a row.  The light commercial vehicle pick-up which is produced there and accounts for over 90% share of the market segment, is derived off the Isuzu KB pick-up. IMSA CEO and MD Michael Sacke highlighted that the company’s initial focus would be to fully consolidate its operations, while laying the foundation for the company’s future success. “Our short-term focus is on implementing our transitional plans, ensuring the sustainability of our operations, further strengthening our product portfolio and relocating the truck operations from Kempston Road to the Struandale plant. “As we do this, we will need to demonstrate excellence in everything we do and the ability to lead in key segments of the market.” He said that, in the medium-term, the company would need to plan for the successful launch of future products, implement measures to increase its domestic market share and increase its exports into other Sub-Saharan African markets. Sacke said the company was already making good progress in achieving these objectives and that Isuzu trucks accounted for around 15% share of the medium and heavy commercial market last year, cementing its leadership position in these segments of the market for over five years in a row. “In 2017, and in an environment where we were transitioning our business to a new business model, we grew our Isuzu KB volumes by 14.8% versus the same period the year before. This gave us a share of 14% in the pick-up D segment of the market, thus demonstrating the confidence that South African consumers have in our brand and vehicles.” Trade and Industry Minister Dr Rob Davies said that although South Africa had been facing some “significant challenges”, he was pleased that Isuzu had made the commitment to invest in the country. “They are here for the long run,” he stated. “This project is coming into fruition as the investment climate is improving and the prospects for growth are improving. We know that this investment will mean that a 1 000 jobs in the facility will be saved and there are 3 000 jobs in the direct supply chain and many thousands more in the supply companies; jobs will continue to be guaranteed in the future,” Davies added. “South Africa is a strategic move for us. It has the infrastructure and capabilities to serve as a springboard for long-term growth on the continent.  This is a ground-breaking initiative for us,” said Katayama.