South African Reserve Bank subsidiary, the South African Mint, has announced new collectables product ranges that will appear in the global coin market this year, including the ‘Celebrating South Africa’ series, which will commemorate the life of former President, distinguished Statesman and global icon Nelson Mandela. “A new bi-metallic R5 circulation and proof quality coin is central to this range, affording the general South African public and coin collectors alike the opportunity to celebrate Mandela’s birth centenary,” the Mint said in a statement on Monday. The new Mandela coin depicts the image of a smiling Nelson Mandela on the reverse. This image was specifically chosen to complement the last two R5 circulation coins issued in 2000 after Nelson Mandela’s presidential term ended and in 2008 following his ninetieth birthday. The obverse of the R5 coin features the national coat of arms, the year ‘2018’ (the year in which the coin will be issued), and the words ‘South Africa’ (English) and ‘Aforika Borwa’ (Setswana). The coin will go into circulation in July, the month of Mandela’s birthday. 
	 
	“The new R5 Mandela coin is one of the most secure coins to go into the pockets of South Africans, featuring new latent imaging technology,” said South African Mint MD Tumi Tsehlo.
	 
	“The latent image on the commemorative circulation coin serves two purposes; it is not only aesthetically pleasing to the eye, but also serves as a security feature which every user of the coin will be able to recognise. The latent image features the years 1918 and 2018 and will exhibit distinct images depending on the viewing angle.” “2018 is an important year for South Africa as we celebrate a man who helped alter the destiny of our wonderful country. The new R5 Mandela coin continues the fine tradition of immortalising the country’s stalwarts and keeps the history alive. Last year we commemorated OR Tambo’s centenary and his legacy,” added Tsehlo. Meanwhile, the South African Mint is also introducing a new Krugerrand denomination – the 2018 2 oz Krugerrand. The release of the 2 oz gold-proof Krugerrand is a significant event in the coin’s history spanning over 50 years. Only 200 will be minted and the proof version will carry the same iconic design as the bullion gold coin. “The Krugerrand, over the past 50 years, has been synonymous with trust and value and it is this consistency that will keep the brand relevant and top-of-the-mind over the next five decades,” said Tsehlo. Among other introductions in 2018 is the Computed Tomography (CT) Scan-themed sterling silver Crown and Tickey coins, the Palaeontology-themed 24 ct gold Natura and the return of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco) Man and Biosphere gold and silver coins. “We are excited to reintroduce the Unesco Man and Biosphere range, which is hugely popular locally and internationally. The birds and flowers selected for the colours coins also come from the biospheres we celebrate in this range,” Tsehlo noted.