A resolution passed by City of Cape Town council earlier this week is expected to get the ball rolling in expediting housing opportunities across the city.

According to a statement by the City of Cape Town, the city's Transport and Urban Development Authority (TDA) will now conclude the four contracts for the appointment of multi-disciplinary teams tasked with overseeing the successful implementation of housing developments.

"These teams – one for each of the City's four areas – will consist of a number of professionals," said mayoral committee member for transport and urban development Brett Herron.

"They will oversee and monitor the planning, design, and construction of thousands of housing opportunities across Cape Town."

A resolution had to be passed through the city's council because the contracts will be in place for longer than three years. The city approved the appointments to be made on Thursday.

"The go-ahead from Council enables the TDA to streamline our planning processes, and thus, to expedite the delivery of housing opportunities," Herron said.

"Given that the contracts are in place for longer than three years, it means we do not need to issue a new tender for the appointment of multi-disciplinary teams for each and every housing project in the medium term. This way, we already have a team of professionals ready in all four areas of the City who can immediately get working on a new housing project."

INVESTMENT
Herron explained that initially, the multi-disciplinary teams will work on at least 12 housing developments across Cape Town.

These developments will provide approximately 13 000 housing opportunities and together amount to an investment of approximately R184-million.

"They will also get working on new projects as these are approved and budgeted for."

"The housing opportunities will become available within the next two to three years, depending on the type of development and the area where the development is taking place."

He added that the developments will include all housing typologies including rental accommodation, site-and-serviced erven, double-storey units, double- and single-story semi-detached units, as well as double- and single-storey free-standing units.

"Where required, the developments will include community facilities, open spaces where residents can socialise, and commercial and retail opportunities."

The contracts will be funded using the Urban Settlements Development Grant, as well as from the Housing Development Capital Fund, Herron said.