Twenty-nine South African students and scholars have received Fulbright scholarships to conduct research and complete postgraduate studies at US academic institutions. The US Department of State-funded Fulbright Program provides scholarships to university graduates seeking a Master’s or Doctoral degree in nearly any field of study at a university in the US. Thirteen of the South Africans will pursue high-level degrees at universities throughout the US, including at Harvard University and the University of Notre Dame. In addition, throughout the next three months, eight scholars will travel to the US to conduct research in fields ranging from grapevine ecophysiology to audiology. The National Research Foundation partners with the US Embassy to sponsor graduates pursuing Doctoral degrees. Five more South Africans will travel in the coming weeks as Hubert H Humphrey Fellows to pursue nondegree academic study, while two Fulbright Foreign Language Teaching Assistants will also teach isiZulu at American universities. Additionally, one South African professor will be lecturing at Dickinson College as a Fulbright Scholar-in-Residence. Last week, Chargé d’Affaires Jessye Lapenn hosted the 2018 class of Fulbright students and scholars at a dinner in Johannesburg. Lapenn encouraged the students and scholars to use the opportunity to learn in an American academic setting, make new friends and professional colleagues, while engaging in the global community. Commenting on his experience as a Fulbright alumnus, Investec chairperson Fani Titi told the scholarship recipients that “this is not just education for the sake of it”. “To me, the education is world-class. But I encourage you to also embrace the country and its people,” he said. Titi completed his Master’s degree in mathematics at the University of California Berkeley on a Fulbright scholarship. The Fulbright Program is the US government’s flagship international education exchange programme and is designed to increase mutual understanding between the people of the US and other countries. The Fulbright Program attracts the brightest talent in the world, who share a dedication to return home and make a difference through collaboration and innovation. The Fulbright Program operates in over 160 countries worldwide and, since 1953, more than 2 100 South African students and scholars have pursued studies and research in the US.