Neutral data centre provider Teraco will be expanding its largest infrastructure build project to date, the Teraco Isando Campus (JB1), in Gauteng, by adding 2 000 cabinets during Phase 1, which will boost JB1’s capacity to 5 700 cabinets. The near R1-billion investment will increase JB1’s usable floor space by 4 000 m2, expanding to a total of 12 000 m2 across the data centre campus. The anticipated ready-for-service date is the third quarter of 2019. A total of 60 MW power will be reticulated to the site, addressing requirements for further expansion after Phase 1 has been completed. The total power available to JB1 will reach 80 MW. The increased demand for additional data centre capacity is driven by cloud uptake and enterprise organisations wanting access to the Teraco platform, says Teraco CFO Jan Hnizdo. He sees continued demand for Teraco’s services, given the unique business model and secular growth trends as the African continent continues to digitally transform. Teraco’s offering to clients of resilient data centre facilities allows for a choice of more than 200 telecommunications companies (telcos) providing connectivity to Africa and the lowest latency interconnection points to cloud and content. “The Teraco platform enables enterprises to have direct private connections to all the leading cloud providers in the most latency efficient and resilient manner possible. “Enterprises can deploy their public, private and hybrid cloud strategies from the Teraco platform, which allows for complete freedom of choice from a cloud provider perspective, as well as significantly reducing the time and cost for enterprises to access these cloud platforms,” explains Hnizdo. Over the past decade, Teraco has focused on growing its ecosystem of telcos, content, financial services, enterprise and service providers. Hnizdo says Teraco is committed to growing its capacity across its core hubs, thereby ensuring that clients have certainty and the flexibility of expansion to take part in the digital transformation that is happening across sub-Saharan Africa. “Teraco continues to invest significantly into the region’s information and communications technology infrastructure and has built, what is now, Africa’s largest data centre at JB1. We take pride in our vendor neutral offering, with open access to interconnection and world class resilient data centre infrastructure for all our clients.”