JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The Voorspoed diamond mine in the Free State is scheduled to close by year end if the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) is unable to secure in the next 30 days a suitable buyer that will ensure continued employment and ongoing economic activity in the Kroonstad area. This follows an intense nine-month expression-of-interest process that has failed to deliver a potential future acquirer of the ten-year-old De Beers Consolidated Mines (DBCM) operation. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video.) “Unfortunately, we’ve not been able to identify a bidder that met the necessary criteria and so we’ve reluctantly taken the decision to close the operation in a responsible manner, as it is no longer economically viable for DBCM to operate the mine. We do not underestimate the impact this will have on the mine’s employees and we’ve put appropriate support structures in place,” DBCM CEO Phillip Barton told Mining Weekly Online, following DBCM’s engagement with the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) on Monday, at which DBCM confirmed that it is principally not opposed to the DMR’s request of embarking on a process to identify a proposed operator within a 30-day period, beginning on August 1 and ending on August 31. “We look forward to engaging with the DMR further in relation to this proposal in order to understand and finalise the basis upon which it will be undertaken,” Barton said. DBCM’s priority throughout its transparent disposal process has always been the safety and well-being of its employees, with the company expressing strong commitment to ensuring that any potential future operator has the required technical and financial capability as well as values aligned with those of DBCM. The closure process will take place in parallel with the separate process of the DMR seeking to identify and propose an operator capable of purchasing Voorspoed. DBCM received a high number of 42 initial expressions of interest from potential buyers, but none met the technical, financial and values criteria required to sustain the mine. As a consequence, De Beers Consolidated Mines (DBCM) announced on Tuesday that its board of directors had taken the decision “to proceed with the responsible closure and rehabilitation” of the ten-year-old operation, with due consideration being given to the company’s 650 employees and contractors and host communities. “We’ve cast the net very wide that we don’t think a suitable takeover is at all likely,” Barton told Mining Weekly Online. DBCM is committed to conducting the closure process in consultation with employees, the union, host communities and the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR), “in a transparent and responsible manner, while continuing to uphold the highest safety standards at the mine until its closure at the end of this year”. Voorspoed, which has a history dating back to 1906, remained dormant for a century until DBCM went ahead with the opencast diamond mine, located some 30 km north-east of Kroonstad, in 2008. DBCM’s decision to place Voorspoed on the market last November was taken to provide the opportunity for responsible lower-cost operators to employ a different operating model that could potentially extend the mine’s operating life beyond 2020, thereby contributing to the host community through continued employment opportunities and economic activity. “We opened the mine in 2008 as part of a ten-year project and as we started getting towards the end of life of mine,  we proceeded on the normal process that we do and that is to look at the options: do we run the mine until closure, do we try and extend the life of mine, or do we try and sell it and hand it over to somebody else that can extend the economic life for the mine? “In many cases, we’ve been very successful at that. We firstly started to look at extending the life of mine and we had our mother company, Anglo American, bring in some of their global experts and we looked at everything: different ways of approaching the opencast, underground options, combinations of opencast and underground options and, sadly, we did not come up an option, in terms of our structure, that would make commercial sense to sustainably continue Voorspoed mine,” Barton outlined to Mining Weekly Online. It was then decided to go for a sale option in an attempt to ensure continued employment and continued economic activity in the Kroonstad area and in the diamond world. Based on previous diamond mine selling experiences, the initial response was phenomenal. “We then suffered a sidewall failure right in the middle of this process in February 2018. It took us a while to work through what the company has dealt with many times in the past, but the bad news around the Voorspoed sidewall failure in particular was that the only way to make it safe reduced the life of mine, because we had to buttress that particular wall and that covered part of the current Cut Three, so that brought the life of mine forward by a year to the end of 2018. “We then informed the bidders because at that stage there were still 12 bidders left in the disposal process, and only four withdrew. They then went through the due diligence process and in the end we received four binding bids. In analysing those four binding bids, we’ve always said that we were going to look at a couple of criteria, which includes the technical ability to be able to mine Voorspoed mine sustainably into the future and the financial ability because if you don’t have money to continue investing, then it’s not successful. “And then we also wanted, as in the past, somebody with a good reputation that you can be comfortable that you’re passing you’re employees and a mine and a community on to somebody that shares a number of your values and then also economic empowerment credentials are clear. “The aim was to sell Voorspoed as a going concern that is going to be sustainable for a few more years into the future. Sadly, when we analysed four binding bids, none met all of those criteria and we made a recommendation to the board to proceed with closure and cease mining operations by the end of this year and then enter the formal closure process after that. “I have met with the DMR, represented by the DG himself, and he shared with us as we are aware, that the Minister and the department are very concerned about all these mines that are in care and maintenance and in closure and it’s all about South Africa, job losses that we’ve got to try to curtail. “So, what we’ve agreed this morning is that we would continue with the closure process as we set out, but that in parallel, the DMR – they get approached from time to time by a number of investors – that might not have fallen within that ambit of our initial search. So, for a short period, they’ll see if there is somebody on their side, but in the meantime we’ll run the closure in parallel. “We will be engaging extensively with our employees because at the end of the day it’s now about our employees, it’s about our communities and De Beers have got a proud track record of really caring for it employees and caring for its communities. “The one undertaking that I can give is that that normal care will be evident over the next few months and beyond that as we close and exit Voorspoed mine. In total more than 650 people that will be directly affected in terms of employment at Voorspoed mine. We’ve stopped talking about contractors. Contractors are also our employees. These are business partners that we’ve got,” Barton told Mining Weekly Online. He emphasised that DBCM’s criteria are set to protect the company’s employees and its communities. “I don’t want the uncertainty to prevail, so we’re continuing with the closure process, but we’ll work with the DMR in parallel should something happen, but we believe we’ve done a fairly good process. “Closure is expensive, we’ve got to look after our employees in terms of their rights. We’ve got our closure liabilities that we’ve got to look after and we’ve never, even with the mines we’ve sold, we’ve never just left those communities,” he added. Through its various corporate social investment programmes, the company has a track record of provided ongoing support when transferring mine ownership and engaging in mine closure. “We won’t, come December, just cut the umbilical cord,” he promised.