The national security veto included in the Competition Amendment Bill, tabled before Parliament on Tuesday, had been “tightly codified” so as not to deter potential investors, but rather offer certainty, Economic Development Minister Ebrahim Patel said during a briefing in Cape Town. Currently, South Africa has no legal provisions for considering security issues in a merger involving a foreign acquiring firm. However, in a move that has raised some eyebrows domestically, the Bill includes a section enabling the President to appoint a committee of Ministers to determine whether a merger by a foreign firm can be justified on national security grounds. Patel said the provision for a national security veto was in line with the Constitutional responsibility of the executive for national security, as outlined in Section 198 of the Constitution. A national security committee would be convened only in those instances where an acquiring firm was located in a sector, or region, listed for a national security review. The President would publish the list of affected sectors in the Government Gazette. The committee would be empowered to approve the merger unconditionally, impose conditions on the transaction, or prohibit the merger on national security grounds. However, the committee would have no say over competition and public-interest considerations, which would be adjudicated separately, and independently, by the competition authorities. Possible triggers for a national security review included: The committee, which had 60 days to determine if a merger was justifiable on national security grounds, could also consider other relevant factors, including whether a foreign government might control the acquiring firm. Patel said international investors were unlikely to be put off by the provision, as national security reviews were common internationally, including in the US, the European Union, Canada, China and Australia. In some of those countries the issue of national security had been more broadly framed to include everything from impacts on cultural heritage or land ownership. “So by the standards of what investors have seen elsewhere in the world, they will see this as a very tightly codified set of issues from which they can draw a very direct link to national security.” However, in a note on the Bill, Herbert Smith Freehills partner Jean Meijer described the list of national security interests contemplated as “extremely broad” and going “beyond traditional public interest factors that have been the focus of legitimate Ministerial intervention to date”. Meijer argued that the committee's broad discretion, together with the potentially far-reaching consequences of its decisions, could create additional risk for foreign entities considering investment into South Africa. “In South Africa today, where the fight against corruption is a priority, it is of concern that a politically appointed Committee will wield this power over foreign investment. This is particularly so in circumstances where there is no clear guidance as to what standard the committee will have to apply in making its decision to block or impose conditions on foreign investment.” She added that, although public-interest issues had played a role in merger control in South Africa for years, there were numerous checks and balances in place. “There are no similar checks and balances imposed in relation to the power of the committee, making the potential for corruption far greater.” The Bill also stipulates that, once the committee makes its determination, the decision should be Gazetted for the public record. In addition, a report should be tabled for consideration by the National Assembly. “So we have gone the route of transparency even in a difficult area such a [national security]. This is because we simply want to make the point that it is an important function in any democracy for the national executive to be responsible for national security, but, in a democracy, you also want to have a good balance between that imperative and transparency to ensure that decisions are taken in the national interest.” Competition Tribunal chairperson Norman Manoim, who flanked Patel at the briefing, agreed that national security issues were better handled by a political body than by a competition adjudicator, who was not competent to assess whether a transaction posed a security threat. “That is within the province of the national security authorities,” Manoim said, adding that the competition authorities could also not be asked to assess whether a particular country was hostile to the interests of South Africa. “So I think the division of labour, as is designated in the Bill, and what is left with the competition authorities, is appropriate to the different functions that they serve.” Patel anticipated that the Parliamentary process for considering the legislation would be concluded before the end of 2018.