Brazilian aerospace group Embraer announced on Tuesday that it had signed a multi-year spare parts and support deal, known as a Pool Programme Agreement, with South Africa-based Sahara Africa Aviation (Sahara). The agreement covers more than 500 components for two Embraer ERJ 145 50-seater regional jets that Sahara has recently acquired. Sahara, based at Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport at Nelspruit (Mpumalanga province), is an established operator of Embraer types. It possesses the world’s biggest fleet of Embraer EMB 120 Brasília 30-seat twin turboprop commuter airliners, numbering 14. These aircraft are leased out to airlines and corporations across Africa. Sahara is certified as both an Air Operator and an Air Maintenance Organisation by the South African Civil Aviation Authority. Regularly audited, it provides contract services to regional airline operators and to the mining, oil and gas sectors. “Sahara Aviation has for many years enjoyed a fruitful relationship with Embraer with our existing EMB 120 fleet,” explained Sahara owner and MD Trevor Brotherton. “As the needs of our clients grew in wanting bigger capacity aircraft, Sahara had no hesitation in turning to Embraer for our ERJ 145 acquisitions.” “We are humbled and proud that Sahara has chosen to place its trust in us to support its fleet, further reinforcing Embraer’s commitment to customers in the region with [the] TechCare portfolio of solutions,” affirmed Embraer VP customer relationship management (commercial aviation) John Linn. “Embraer’s Pool Programme leverages increased competitiveness providing repairable solutions through reduced lead times and costs allowing Sahara to focus on aircraft operations. You fly, we support!” “The Pool Programme was a natural fit that offers a sensible, cost effective and practical parts solution to our business together with their expertise and support in training, monitoring, advice and problem solving,” stated Brotherton. “Sahara looks forward to a bright future underpinned by Embraer’s technical and parts support.”