From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: After a decade in design and construction, the MeerKAT radio telescope, which is located about 90km from Carnarvon in the Northern Cape, was inaugurated earlier this month. Simone Liedtke tells us a bit more about this step towards building an international enterprise. Simone Liedtke: The MeerKAT radio telescope is the precursor to the R10-billion Square Kilometre Array (SKA), an international enterprise to build the largest and most sensitive radio telescope globally. The MeerKAT will be integrated into the mid-frequency component of the SKA’s first phase by 2020. The first phase of the SKA will see 133 dishes built in the Karoo desert of South Africa by 2026. These will join the 64 dishes of the MeerKAT array that have been completed, at the same location. By around 2030, the second phase of the SKA is planned to extend its network of dishes into eight African partner countries, namely Ghana, Kenya, Zambia, Namibia, Botswana, Madagascar, Mozambique and Mauritius. SKA chief scientist Fernando Camilo explains a little more about the science surrounding the MeerKAT. SKA Chief Scientist Fernando Camilo: Simone Liedtke: At the inauguration event earlier this month, which was officiated by Deputy President David Mabuza, a panorama obtained with the new telescope was unveiled. The panorama reveals extraordinary detail in the region surrounding the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. According to Camilo, the centre of the galaxy was an “obvious target” for demonstrating the science capabilities of the new instrument. SKA Chief Scientist Fernando Camilo: Simone Liedtke: Innovations and technologies, such as the MeerKAT, create a platform to enable future generations to learn, develop and innovate, which Mabuza said will, in turn, enable South Africa to move forward in terms of research, science and technology. Further, about 75% of the MeerKAT’s components have been manufactured in South Africa by several subcontractors. SKA Chief Scientist Fernando Camilo: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.