The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) sector on Friday showed its support to small, medium-sized and microenterprises in the recycling sector by providing equipment that will enable the enterprises’ effective participation in the mandatory recycling programme launched by the City of Ekurhuleni earlier this month. PET recycling company Petco and PET bottle manufacturer Serioplast donated the equipment, which includes baling machines, industrial platform scales and signage, with the aim of improving the collection, weighing and baling of recyclable material for resale to recycling businesses. The small businesses include Ekhuliza Gauteng Primary Cooperative and CJU Environmental Management, in Boksburg, and Lakhwisha Holdings, in Vosloorus. More beneficiaries are set to receive similar equipment donations from Petco in the coming weeks. Speaking at the handover of the equipment, on Friday, which took place at CJU Environmental Management’s premises and which was hosted in partnership with the City of Ekurhuleni, the city’s waste management divisional head, Madikana Thenga, said the municipality is grateful to Petco and Serioplast for donating the equipment. He further noted that the event took place in Nelson Mandela month and that the event highlighted community development. Petco chairperson Casper Durandt mentioned that the company works with government and local communities to reduce waste and better manage waste. He commented that Europe collected and recycled about 57% of PET bottles and containers, while South Africa recycled 65% of its PET bottles and containers. He noted that Petco had started implementing voluntary extended producer responsibility. In the field of waste management, extended producer responsibility is a strategy designed to promote the integration of environmental costs associated with goods throughout their life cycles into the market price of the products. “If you look at our numbers, we achieved what [Europe] cannot achieve with legislated extended producer responsibility,” he enthused. He added that South Africa is “well on track” to achieve 70% PET bottle recycling in the next four to five years. Petco collections and training manager Belinda Booker pointed out that Petco also hosts workshops and training to assist businesses to grow. Further, she said previous participants had undergone five-day accredited training on how to grow their businesses. Serioplast business development manager Allessandro Innocenti, meanwhile, said the company was “proud to support Petco’s commitment to a green, inclusive economy that helps the environment and has a positive impact on local communities”.