French multinational Alstom has signed a heads of agreement with the Lagos state government, which is represented by the Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (Lamata), for both Phase 1 and Phase 2 of the Lagos Blue Line metro, in Nigeria. As part of Phase 1, Alstom will ensure the electrification of a portion of the line with third rail (a method of providing electric power to a railway locomotive through a semi-continuous rigid conductor placement), as well as substations. Following Phase 1, Alstom and the Lagos government intend to work jointly on Phase 2 of the project, which entails structuring financing from export credit agencies to provide metro trains, communications-based train control signalling, the operation and control centre, passenger information services and the ticketing system in the stations. “The Blue Line project is of strategic importance for the city of Lagos as it allows people to travel safely and fast across longer distances. The integration with existing transport systems such as bus or boat lines, and future metro lines, will largely contribute to the global transport plan for Lagos, which aims to reduce traffic congestion and make Lagos a smart city,” commented Lamata MD Abiodun Dabiri. Lagos has 22-million inhabitants and is facing severe traffic congestion. Considering the increasing transport demand in the city, the Blue Line metro aims to address mobility challenges, stimulate economic growth and job creation, while improving the environment and air quality in the city. It will carry 400 000 passengers a day initially, with capacity to increase to 700 000 passengers a day at full completion. Alstom Middle East and Africa senior VP Didier Pfleger added that the Blue Line will contribute to positioning the city among the showcases of sustainable mobility in Africa. The Blue Line will comprise a 27 km line with 13 stations from the cities of Okokomaiko to Marina. Phases 1 and 2 of the line will cover a distance of 12 km and have five stations. This project is the first reference for Alstom in Nigeria.