Communications Minister Nomvula Mokonyane has appointed a broadcasting digital migration advisory council to advise on various issues on the digital terrestrial television (DTT) migration project. These included the analogue switch-off plan, strategies to increase DTT uptake by households and to support the newly established, dedicated project management office (PMO), led by Aldred Dreyer. “Key among the council’s immediate task is to, in collaboration with the PMO, advise the Minister on the analogue switch-over plan, including the countdown to the Free State’s switch-off by December 2018, as announced last month,” the Department of Communications (DoC) said on Tuesday. Leaders, representatives and executives from the departments of Trade and Industry and Telecommunications and Postal Services, as well as MTN, Sentech, Multichoice, Vodacom and the South African Broadcasting Corporation, besides others, have been appointed to the council. Independent Communications Authority of South Africa councillor Nomonde Gongxeka-Seopa has been appointed the chairperson of the advisory council. The other members of the advisory council include Dreyer, Nomsa Philiso, Norman Munzhelele, Percy Mathabela, Linden Petzer, Themba Kinana, Moses Mashisane, Tebogo Leshope, Thabo Makenete, Michael Markovitz and Sipho Mngqibisa. The members of the advisory council will be in office until analogue switch-over has been completed in the country. Further, Mokonyane plans to release the newly revised DTT delivery model to expedite the analogue switch-off within the next few weeks. The DoC aims to table the delivery model, and expected switch-off date, with Cabinet for consultation. The review of the model included elements of partnerships and collaborations with industry; efficiency and affordability by building on existing infrastructure and distribution networks; inclusive participation; and transparency and accountability. After years of delay, the DTT project remains beset with numerous challenges inhibiting the full transition from analogue to digital broadcasting.