Ctrack, a member of the Nasdaq-listed Inseego group, has launched a low-cost fleet tracking and optimisation tool, called Drive, for small and medium companies. Ctrack says Drive is ideal for companies with fleets of 30 vehicles or less, such as florists, plumbers, pathology labs and towing companies. These companies typically do not have dedicated fleet managers and managing fleets is not their core business. Drive is an interactive Web-based solution that looks the same on a mobile phone (Android or Apple), laptop or tablet. GPS integration locates vehicles and drivers in real-time. Responsive mapping indicates a driver’s current location, as well as their destination, giving small businesses the ability to provide their customers with updated estimated times of arrival. Drive can also provide an overview of a company’s in-progress and scheduled tasks, with the tracking of deliveries and job statuses also performed in real-time. With Drive, it is possible to schedule jobs beforehand, assigning them to specific drivers and/or vehicles. After entering the tasks for the day, a built-in route optimisation function determines the most efficient routes for drivers to travel. This reduces the time taken and distances driven, as well as the amount of fuel consumed on a daily basis, explains Ctrack Fleet Management GM Eugene van Niekerk. It also means that drivers do not waste time phoning controllers for assistance. Turn-by-turn navigation means drivers should not get lost, while a trip score highlights areas that require driver improvements. Real-time driving violations are reported, such as where vehicles stopped, sped, or idled excessively. Using geo-fencing capability, vehicles can be limited to predefined areas, with alerts sent when breaches occur. These alerts can be sent and received via the Drive app, SMS or email and can be categorised and organised into user groups, making them simpler to manage. Drive users can create vehicle service intervals of differing lengths and service types, while drivers can report vehicle faults through the app. Business and private logbooks can be produced and separated, with the business logbook used to recover business mileage expenses. Detailed and fully customisable reports can be downloaded for further scrutiny. These reports should assist small business owners in gaining more insight into their cost items. A stolen vehicle recovery service is also included. “Drive is the culmination of 30 years of experience and reflects a deep understanding of the needs of our customers across the diverse fleet telematics market,” says Ctrack Global COO Cobus Grove. “This system grants business owners full online visibility of their company’s fleet, for improved operational efficiencies, on the move. Drive enables Ctrack clients to make split-second decisions that reduce costs from the first day of implementation.” Paying R2 900 in cash for installation, Drive users have access to the system at a fee of R159 a month. Rental fees are R259 a month. 