Alstom has successfully started the test run of the first Coradia Polyvalent train to be delivered to Senegal at Alstom’s site in Reichshoffen, in France, which marks the start of an extensive testing campaign prior to its departure. These tests, the rail transport company explained, will allow Alstom to make adjustments to the train before its forthcoming delivery to Senegal. The Coradia Polyvalent train is dual-mode (diesel/electric) and is capable of running at speeds of 160 km/h. With a total length of 72 m, the train has four cars, a capacity of 400 passengers and a first and second class. The train is also adapted to the climatic and environmental conditions of Senegal and has a highly efficient air conditioning system, Alstom noted. Its low floor also provides easier access and on-board movement in particular for people with reduced mobility.

The Coradia Polyvalent trains are part of the Regional Express Train Project (TER), a flagship element of Senegal President Macky Sall's Plan for an Emerging Senegal (PES) policy framework. The acquisition of the trains is aimed at meeting the increasing need for mobility in Dakar and will run on the new line that will connect the centre of Dakar to the new Blaise Diagne International Airport (AIBD), in Diass. The trains will serve 14 stations over a distance of 55 km, which the trains will cover in 45 minutes. The number of daily passengers is estimated at 115 000.

“This test run is a significant milestone for Alstom and for the project. We are proud to conduct the tests in order to guarantee not only the smooth running of the trains but also the control of all norms to guarantee maximum safety for both [Senegal’s investment promotion agency] APIX and passengers,” said Alstom Middle East and Africa VP Didier Pfleger. More than 40 people are mobilised at Alstom’s Reichshoffen site to carry out the 6 000 serial tests and the 50 validation tests to check and guarantee the correct functioning of the train, the company noted on Wednesday.

Five other sites in France are involved in the project, namely Saint-Ouen for the design, Le Creusot for the bogies, Ornans for the motors and alternators, Tarbes for the traction system and Villeurbanne for the on-board information technology systems and passenger information.

Coradia Polyvalent, which has already been adopted by SNCF and the French regions, as well as by SNTF in Algeria, belongs to Alstom's Coradia range of modular trains, which benefits from over 30 years of expertise and proven technical solutions. More than 2 800 Coradia trains have been sold so far and around 2 300 are currently in service.