Environmental Affairs Minister Dr Edna Molewa has given notice in the Government Gazette of four industry waste tyre management plans. The plans were received for consideration in response to government’s call on the tyre industry to prepare and submit an industry waste tyre management plan for approval. The plans received were submitted by Tyre Waste Abatement & Minimisation Initiative of South Africa, Evergreen Energy, JPC Energy Systems and South African Tyre Reuse Company. Waste tyres have been identified as a priority waste stream, based on the threat that their indiscriminate disposal poses to the environment. The broad policy direction is to reduce the environmental externalities associated with waste tyres, by diverting waste tyres away from landfill and maximising the value extracted from waste tyres as a resource by encouraging reuse, recycling and waste-to-energy. The Minister has invited the public to comment on the demonstration and response by the various plans on upstream and downstream value chain, including the market demand and supply analysis. Comments should focus specifically on the advantages or disadvantages of each plan to ultimately advance sound waste tyre management throughout aspects of the value chain – from design to the post-consumer phase, and considering all sources and types of waste tyres in the industry. “Circular economy is at the heart of resource efficiency and relevant comments in this regard are encouraged. “Views on the impact of the plans on training and development towards the creation of sustainable jobs are also welcome,” the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) said. Additionally, the DEA welcomes opinions on the various plans’ responsiveness to social upliftment of vulnerable communities, participation and professionalising of the informal sector, as well as remarks on the financial proposal for implementation of the industry waste tyre management plans. The DEA will also host public hearings throughout the country from May 18 to June 4.