The Young Professionals Forum (YPF), which is part of Consulting Engineers South Africa (Cesa), will host six prominent events this year to aid the advancement of young professionals within the consulting engineering industry. At Cesa’s yearly presidential breakfast, on Tuesday, YPF Gauteng North chairperson Keith Katyora said the first event coming up is the Zitholele great debate, which will be hosted by YPF’s Gauteng South division, on June 7. Thereafter YPF Gauteng North will host the Future Leaders’ career expo on July 20. Thirdly, YPF will host a panel discussion under the theme ‘Transform Yourself’, on August 1, which will see panellists from three industry professions speak to young professionals about mapping out their career plans. Next up will be a YPF Gauteng South and consultancy UWP Consulting-hosted quiz night, on September 6, followed by an energy debate to gather the perspective of young professionals on September 13. Katyora noted that there has been a lot of talk around State-owned power utility Eskom’s possible restructuring, which will play a role in the future energy development of South Africa, and this event will engage young professionals on their stance around the restructuring. He added that this debate is aimed at creating awareness and opening the door for young professionals around energy debates, since many discussions that have occurred did not include the voice of young people. YPF will further host a charity drive, starting in June and ending in November, where it will donate calculators to schools within the Soshanguve area, in the north of Gauteng. YPF National will also host the Sustainability Imbizo on August 14 and 15, which Katyora said provides a platform for young professionals to network. Lastly, YPF and Cesa will host a job shadowing initiative from May to July, which affords young professionals the opportunity to learn from Cesa members and experience what it is like to be a consulting engineer. Katyora pointed out that YPF will, this year, seek to partner with tertiary institutions and some companies within Cesa to create a mentorship platform for young professionals. YPF’s objectives are to create awareness around the engineering profession, to promote the development of high-quality professionals within the industry and to address relevant issues that affect young professionals – especially with regard to registration and professional development. Further, the organisation aims to foster, cultivate and understand relationships with client bodies. YPF represents young professionals in the industry that are under 35 years of age.