Natural gas development company Renergen has signed an offtake agreement with Anheuser-Busch InBev (AB InBev)subsidiary South African Breweries (SAB) for the supply of liquefied natural gas (LNG) to power its delivery trucks. The agreement sees the initial roll out of compressed natural gas to a small fleet of SAB trucks in the Gauteng area, using gas from Renergen’s Tetra4 operations, in Virginia, in the Free State. This will be expanded to a significantly larger fleet to run on LNG once Tetra4’s plant reaches operational status in 2019. “This agreement with SAB marks another large-scale South African logistics operation to use new age fuels. The use of LNG not only drastically reduces carbon emissions, but has the added advantage of improving the vehicle’s lifecycle maintenance and reduces the operator’s cost significantly. “Renergen wants to remain a pioneer in alternative energy sources and is proud to be associated with SAB in such a landmark agreement,” said Renergen CEO Stefano Marani. He pointed out to Engineering News Online that there is a global move away from diesel-powered trucks to LNG-powered trucks and that the company continues to discuss the benefits of LNG with some of the bigger fleet owners in the country. In addition, Marani highlighted that AB InBev has announced aspirations to reduce its carbon footprint substantially, eradicating it almost entirely by 2025. Marani said the transaction was “a move in the right direction” for AB InBev in this regard. “It’s a landmark transaction in South Africa in the sense that this paves the way for other corporates to see that it’s time to look into the environmental and financial benefits of this move from diesel to LNG,” he added, noting that it is “a disruptive technology in the trucking space”. The move, he elaborated, is the best of both worlds – not only do companies get to go green by reducing their carbon footprint, but companies are also saving money while doing it. Under the right conditions, he advised, a carbon footprint can be reduced by up to 90% by running a truck on LNG as opposed to diesel.