From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Kwatani is steadily delivering on its largest single screening machine order to date after kicking off the manufacturing process at its East Rand facilities in March. Natasha Odendaal tells us more after a visit to the site: Natasha Odendaal: The original-equipment manufacturer officially secured the contract late last year, with the 44 screening machines headed for an undisclosed large opencast coal mining complex. Showcasing the group’s production facilities during an open day in March, MD Kim Schoepflin speaks of how the order is a remarkable achievement in a particularly challenging period for industry, as well as process of delivering the 44 screening machines. Kwatani MD Kim Schoepflin: Natasha Odendaal: Kwatani will deliver an estimated two screens a week, as required over the next few months, adjusting for and in line with the opencast mine’s expansion and installation schedule. Kwatani MD Kim Schoepflin: Natasha Odendaal: In a separate contract for a South Africa iron-ore mine, the company is also building its strongest and heaviest scalping screen yet. Kwatani MD Kim Schoepflin: Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: World’s largest oxygen production plant inaugurated at Sasol Secunda Petrochemicals giant Sasol last month inaugurated its seventeenth Air Seperation Unit at their operations in Secunda. Marleny Arnoldi tells us more. Marleny Arnoldi: This ASU is currently the world’s largest oxygen production plant and will produce 5 000 tonnes of oxygen a day. Sasol CEO Bongani Nqwababa explains why oxygen is integral to Sasol’s operations. Sasol CEO Bongani Nqwababa: Marleny Arnoldi: Construction for the ASU started in 2015 to provide Sasol with additional oxygen and nitrogen, as well as xenon and krypton, which are used in medical scanners, laser technology and high-speed photography equipment. Nqwababa elaborates further. Sasol CEO Bongani Nqwababa: Marleny Arnoldi: France-based oxygen plant specialists Air Liquide have designed all seventeen of Sasol’s ASU’s. Air Liquide CEO Benoît Potier tells us more about the plant design. Air Liquide CEO Benoît Potier: Marleny Arnoldi: For the first time an ASU at Sasol will be owned and operated by an outsourced company. Nqwababa tells us what inspired this decision. Sasol CEO Bongani Nqwababa: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.