Defence and aerospace company Paramount Group’s joint venture in Kazakhstan, Kazakhstan Paramount Engineering (KPE), has secured a new and substantial order from the government of Kazakhstan for its advanced 4 x 4 mine-protected armoured personnel carrier, the Arlan. This follows the recent announcement that KPE has delivered a large batch of Arlans, the localised version of Paramount’s Marauder, to the Kazakhstan Special Forces as the company’s local manufacturing facilities continue to accelerate production. The Arlans are in operation with the Ministry of Defence, Special Forces and other law enforcement agencies, and boast customised features including, enhanced winterisation technology. Production on the new order has started, with deliveries expected during this year and next. “The latest Arlan order is a strong endorsement of the leading-edge technologies and industrial capability of KPE’s manufacturing base in Kazakhstan,” said Paramount chairperson Ivor Ichikowitz. He adds that innovating to provide the necessary modern-day security and defence solutions is a responsibility that can only be realised through strategic alliances with governments and strong local partners. “We are tremendously proud of this achievement and the commitment of our partners and employees to deliver world-class solutions to our customers.” Showcasing its culture of innovation, KPE, for the first time, unveiled its own designed and developed light mechanical turret at the Kazakhstan Defence Expo (Kadex) 2018, fitted and displayed on an Arlan. The Arlan has undergone testing in extreme conditions and environments across Kazakhstan; its continued winterisation includes a new liquid heating system for the all-season-accommodating cabin, which hosts a range of 100 ºC, from -50 ºC to +50 ºC. In a further sign that the 15 000 m2 KPE armoured vehicle factory, in Astana, is expanding its portfolio of armoured vehicle  production, Paramount this week announced that its flagship Infantry Combat Vehicle, the Barys 8, is also nearing production following extensive winter and summer trials with the Kazakhstan armed forces. KPE exhibited its range of advanced armoured vehicles including the Arlan and the Barys with 6 х 6 and 8 х 8 configurations at Kadex, which was held from May 23 to 26. The KPE armoured vehicle factory has capacity to produce more than 200 vehicles a year.