The Nissan Group of Africa has signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the government of Ghana to pave the way for the introduction of an automotive programme in this West African country. “The MoU seeks to unlock economic potential, promote development of the automotive sector and promote investor-friendly regulatory frameworks that encourage sustainable automotive manufacturing,” says Nissan Group of Africa MD Mike Whitfield. “The aim is to work together with governments and industry bodies in West Africa to help with the formulation of auto policy across the continent. “The auto industry has been the catalyst for economic growth in many countries across the world and we believe that Ghana is next.” Nissan opened a semi-knockdown assembly plant in Nigeria in 2014. The plant assembles the Nissan Patrol, Almera, NP300 and Urvan models. Nissan will work in Ghana, as in Nigeria, in partnership with the Stallion Group. “Nissan is leading the drive to offer mobility for Africa,” notes Nissan Africa, Middle East and India chairperson Peyman Kargar. “Stallion has automotive manufacturing experience. The Nissan Group of Africa’s and Stallion’s relationship spans several years.” Nissan is the top-selling automotive brand in Ghana. During 2017, the brand secured 32.8% market share, says Kargar. “The automotive industry contributes to job creation, small business development, skills development, innovation and it contributes to gross domestic product (GDP).” According to data from the International Organisation of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers, Ghana sold around 4 200 new vehicles last year. One-ton pick-ups accounted for around 38% of the new vehicle market, with small, medium and large sports-utility vehicles at 20% and minibuses at 14%, says Nissan. Many countries on the African continent rely on imported used vehicles to answer the demand for mobility. The Japanese vehicle maker believes Ghana and the African market offer great potential for the automotive industry. In Germany, Japan and the US, vehicles per 1 000 people ranges between 600 and 800. In Africa, it is significantly lower, however, with many countries below 100. It is hoped that diversifying Ghana’s economy and revenues through industry will increase manufacturing contribution to GDP from the current 7.5%, to 9.3% in 2019, and 10.8% in 2021 and beyond. 