Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan has appointed Phakamani Hadebe as Eskom CEO. Hadebe has been acting CEO of the power utility since January. The announcement was made at a media briefing, during which Gordhan announced new board appointments for various State-owned enterprises (SoEs) in his portfolio, including Eskom, Transnet, Denel and SA Express. Tryphosa Ramano has been appointed SA Express chairperson. The following individuals will serve as directors of SA Express: Ronald Ozzy Lamola Thulani Matiki Norman Kgomo Thandiwe January-McLean Kugan Harikrishna Thaver Bongisiwe Mpondo Hlengiwe Thandeka Makhathini Thabi Leoka Ahmed Ismail Bassa “Cabinet has approved the appointment of a new board to the airline, comprising people with strong ethical character and the appropriate skills, knowledge and experience, particularly in the airline industry,” Gordhan said. Cabinet, meanwhile, also approved the appointment of Popo Molefe as Transnet chairperson, together with several additional directors who have been newly appointed, including: Mpho Emily Letlape Louis von Zeuner Ursula Nobulali Fikelepi Dimakatso Catherine Matshoga Ramasela Joyce Ganda Edward Christian Kieswetter Aluwani Percy Ramabulana Fholisani Sydney Mufamadi Vivien McMenamin Oupa Motaung Gratitude Ramphaka Gordhan further announced that Monhla Hlahla has been appointed Denel chairperson, with the following individuals appointed as board directors: Nonzukiso Zukie Iyotula Mandla Martin Mnisi Nhlanhla Rigney Kunene Tshilidzi Marwala Lieutenant General Temba Templeton Matanzima Gloria Serobe Talib Sadik Susan Rabkin Sibusiso Sibisi Thamsanqa Magazi Hannelie Nel General Siphiwe Nyanda Kabelo Lehloenya “I have confidence that the individuals that have been appointed bring considerable skills, knowledge and experience to the boards,” he said. The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises welcomed the appointment of the new boards at the various. Committee chairperson Lungi Mnganga-Gcbashe added that the committee had noted the good work done by Hadebe at Eskom since he was appointed interim CEO in January. “He brings the experience of the Land Bank, the National Treasury and Absa to the position. We believe he has the right skill set to stabilise Eskom, something the country needs desperately. We have confidence that the new board members, who have been appointed and confirmed, will be able to bring about changes in governance and restore financial stability in the respective SOEs,” she said.