City of Tshwane executive mayor Solly Msimanga this week officially launched Loftus Park – a new mixed-use green precinct, in Pretoria. An official ribbon cutting ceremony for the launch was attended by representatives of the development’s owners and developers, diversified real estate investment trust Redefine Properties and property developer Abland, as well as tenants and other key stakeholders. Anchor brands at Loftus Park include Checkers, Dis-Chem and PNA, as well as restaurants Casa Bella, Turn & Tender, Salsa, Rocomamas, Seattle Coffee Company and Vos Biltong. Loftus Park is located next to Pretoria’s Loftus Versfeld sport stadium, which happens to be in the heart of the city’s sporting, cultural, diplomatic and schools hub. The development’s first phase includes an open-air piazza that is surrounded by restaurants, convenience retail, a Virgin Active health club, added parking for stadium game-goers and about 29 000 m2 of A-grade office space. Speaking at the launch, Msimanga congratulated the leaders that saw this concept before the brick and mortar was put together. “This is the beginning of a world-class city.” Redefine CEO Andrew König said the development furthers the company’s goal to be the landlord of choice for quality space in excellent locations. “We are confident that it will be a winning address for a range of tenants, especially those that seek modern, efficient workspaces.” Abland marketing director Grant Silverman added that, for Abland, this development realises its passion and vision for the immense potential of this property. “It has set a new standard for quality mixed-use precincts in Pretoria. “This market-defining development creates a fresh and unique opportunity for businesses and retailers to position themselves in prime space within one of Pretoria’s up-and-coming central nodes,” he pointed out. As part of the first phase of the development, Marriott is building a new 152-room Protea hotel, with panoramic rooftop views of the city. Phase two of Loftus Park will add another 7 600 m2 to the development, including a proposed hospital. Phase three will introduce 13 000 m2 of additional office space. Once the demand-driven development is complete, it will offer 55 000 m2 of space that is centred around its community and the important business of healthy, balanced living. Its curated variety of convenient everyday and after-work essentials have been specially selected to support its office space and its neighbours. Loftus Park is also expected to be a boost for its greater node, based on the strength of its integrated work and play environment. Its fun, family-orientated atmosphere, big screen, water feature, compelling art installations, play area, and generous secure parking, are all complemented with connectivity, walkability and green spaces. “In fact, the new Loftus Park has enhanced the transport links in this community. Loftus Park is already at the epicentre of the city’s key suburb of Arcadia, within walking distance from the University of Pretoria and the Pretoria Boys & Girls High Schools, and it enjoys excellent proximity to a vast number of embassies, the Union Buildings and museums,” Redefine highlighted.