By doubling the pace at which the local workforce acquires the skills demanded by the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), South Africa can significantly reduce potential job losses. This would, however, require the development of solutions appropriate for Africa, Accenture MD Eric Croeser said at Worley Parsons’ Supplier Grow Conference, on Wednesday. He explained that with the 4IR fast approaching, industry must adapt to new technology. He pointed to four themes in this regard. The first is automation, which involves deploying digitally enabled hardware tools to perform or improve activities that have traditionally been carried out manually or with human-controlled machinery. A digitally-enabled workforce would follow and would result in the use of connected mobility, as well as virtual and augmented reality, to empower field, remote and centralised workers in real-time. Following this would be integrated enterprises, platforms and ecosystems. This, Croeser explained, would link operations, information technology layers as well as devices and systems. Lastly, the adaption of technology would result in next-generation analytics and decision support. This will enable companies to leverage algorithms and artificial intelligence to process data from sources within and beyond the traditional value chain to provide real-time decision support. “It’s how this new technology is incorporated into business strategies that is key to unlocking its true potential, and greater productivity within an organisation,” he stated. This industry-wide move to a platform-style business provides a common set of functions that accelerate application development, connect an ecosystem of previously disparate devices, software and service providers to drive customer outcomes. This move, Croeser said, would also enable innovation and the exchange of value, while increasing in value over time with the addition of data, devices, business applications and users in a virtuous cycle of value creation. “Platform buyers should seek to align with platforms that provide deployment flexibility and breadth of Internet of Things services,” he advised. Further, an enterprise supplier development (ESD) platform, as an example, is an affective delivery model and aims to foster collaboration between all stakeholders, while also introducing technology and innovation to support the delivery of key ESD initiatives, Croeser said. He added that an ESD platform also helps to minimise value leakages and, thereby, maximise impact. “It also allows a more targeted, deliberate and aligned approach towards creating a long-term, sustainable impact,” he pointed out. Croeser stressed that industries “need to become more agile in our thinking and rigid in our execution” while leveraging platform-style offerings and harness the exponential value of the ecosystem.