From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Air Products has invested more than R90-million into a centrally located dissolved acetylene plant in Midvaal, and is decommissioning its two existing plants, located on Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal. Tasneem Bulbulia tells us more. Tasneem Bulbulia: The strategic decision by Air Products to decommission its two plants forms part of the company’s culture of continually improving its facilities, safety, process and service delivery. The new dissolved acetylene plant was officially unveiled by the company on earlier this month. Air Products MD Rob Richardson tells us more. Air Products MD Rob Richardson: Tasneem Bulbulia: The plant boasts the latest and highest standard of global dissolved acetylene facility trends, to produce high-quality gas in a safe, timeous and environmentally sustainable manner. It was designed in-house by an Air Products team that has been involved with the design management and operations of other local facilities for several years. Air Products MD Rob Richardson: Tasneem Bulbulia: The company’s investment pipeline over the past few years encompassed R2-billion, with the most recent projects being its Vanderbijlpark facility’s ‘G-Plant’, and the air separation unit launched in the Eastern Cape in 2014. Richardson says this new facility is an additional, long-term investment, which will improve the company’s business, which, in turn, reinforces its commitment to the country. Midvaal executive mayor Bongani Baloyi applauded Air Products’ decision to build the facility in the Midvaal area, and also committed support. Midvaal executive mayor Bongani Baloyi: Tasneem Bulbulia: Meanwhile, Air Products has entered into an enterprise development initiative with an empowerment company to install a solar energy project at the facility in the near future. Sashnee Moodley: Other news making headlines: SA and Italy seek to grow trade and investment partnerships The fifth edition of the South Africa-Italy indaba, held in Johannesburg, has emphasised the importance of bilateral trade relations and investment partnerships between the two countries. Italian ambassador to South Africa Pietro Giovanni Donnici: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy.