The City of Joburg (CoJ) has released information about three inner city properties that are now open for public tender by potential developers, as part of its inner-city rejuvenation project that comprises over 80 buildings and plots for renovation. This project aims to fulfil the city’s vision of turning Johannesburg into a construction site. The first building is a 999 m2 block of flats located on the corner of Sophie De Bruyn and Rissik streets and is commonly known as Moth Building. The building is in a state of disrepair and is deemed uninhabitable in its current state. Previous tenants were relocated to temporary housing. The city is seeking developers to turn it into a mixed-use development with a special emphasis on mixed rental units. The property is closely located to Johannesburg Park Station and Joubert Park and is within walking distance of Constitutional Hill and the central business district (CBD). The second building is in Marshalltown and is commonly known as Samancor House. It is located within the CBD, in the Maboneng precinct. This area has already undergone much urban regeneration, and the property’s neighbourhood includes government offices, mining houses and banks. The property already boasts a 12-storey building with retail space on the ground floor, offices from the second to twelfth floors and basement parking. However, there is a notably low vacancy rate, which presents an opportunity for investment and further development. The building is expected to serve as commercial, office or retail space. The third site is the Salisbury building, located on the corner of Salisbury and Wemmer Jubilee street, just south of the CBD, in a mixed-use area surrounded by offices, retail shops and industrial developments. With 14 732 m2 of space, it offers significant potential for development. The site is a vacant piece of land; however, it is currently being used as an informal taxi holding, mainly spillover from the nearby Faraday Taxi Facility. The city is seeking developers to turn it into a mixed-use development, specifically focused on mixed residential rentals. Therefore, the development will set aside space to accommodate the current taxis.