South Africa has dropped in ranking as an economically free country, according to the Economic Freedom of the World (EFW) index. The country now ranks 94 out of 162 countries, a sharp slump from its ranking of 46 in 2000. The Free Market Foundation (FMF) launched the index report, which measures the degree to which the policies and institutions of countries support economic freedom, on Wednesday in Johannesburg. Director and founder of NightsBridge, a software company operating in the tourism industry, Neil Emerick said that by using the tool, which he developed to allow users to explore the EFW data, it was easy to note that economic policy truly mattered. Emerick said all issues of corruption and dilapidating State-owned entities in South Africa, all contributed to the results in the report. The index is based on data from 2016 and measures the economic freedom of 162 countries and territories for which data are available. The report revealed that instead of building on its post-apartheid achievement, South Africa started sliding down the rankings and is now in the bottom 40%. This condemns countries to lower incomes, greater poverty, more inequality, reduced life expectancy, fewer political rights and liberties and bleak prospects for the quality of life. FMF executive director Leon Louw said if South Africa is to increase its prosperity and reduce unemployment and poverty, it is essential that the financial sector be allowed to function as freely and efficiently as possible, without stifling bureaucracy. He added that true judicial independence must be restored expeditiously. Hong Kong and Singapore top the index, continuing their streak as 1st and 2nd respectively. The top ten includes New Zealand, Switzerland, Ireland, the US, Georgia, Mauritius, and the UK, with Australia and Canada tied for 10th place. Despite South Africa’s disappointing ranking, Emerick said it was comforting to note that the country continues to do well in the areas of the judiciary and property rights. The 10 lowest-ranked countries are Sudan, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Syria, Algeria, Argentina, Libya, and, last-place, Venezuela. Countries such as North Korea and Cuba cannot be ranked due to lack of data. He said he was hoping that government will take note of such reports so that South Africa can avoid the catastrophe faced by the government of Venezuela. To access full report go to www.fraserinstitute.org/economic-freedom.