JSE-listed Attacq has partnered with property development company Tricolt to launch the first high-rise luxury apartments in Waterfall City, with the first phase of development set to be completed by 2021. The development is comprised of four towers – the Newton, Kepler, Da Vinci and Galileo towers – and includes 590 apartments. Dubbed Ellipse Waterfall, the building is set to transform the urban luxury living landscape in Gauteng’s fastest-growing business node. Residents will be able to select the ideal living space to meet their requirements, from executive one-bedroom apartments, starting from 44 m2 in size, to flagship three-bedroom duplex penthouses, offering up to 327 m2 of living space, including private rooftop gardens and heated pools. “For Attacq, our focus is to provide capital growth and distributable earnings by leveraging our four value drivers, the most notable of which is our Waterfall development. Ellipse represents a natural next step as we look to diversify the residential offering within Waterfall City and expand on our work, live, play value proposition,” Attacq CEO Melt Hamman says. Tricolt CEO Tim Kloeck believes Ellipse Waterfall will offer an attractive value proposition. “ . . . located in the heart of the city, Ellipse Waterfall will provide a secure, lock-up-and-go type convenience whether bought as a home or buy-to-let investment”. Residents will also have access to ‘The Luna Club’, an exclusive multi-concept lifestyle destination for Ellipse Waterfall residents of all ages with premium wellness, fine dining, business and leisure services at their front door. “Waterfall’s expansion into the residential space was both strategic and necessary, which is why we entered into a joint venture with industry leaders, Tricolt. They are renowned for their superior developments, built to the highest quality, and their ability to deliver on time and within budget. “We believe that with this addition to our . . . offering, the precinct will finally cement its place as Gauteng’s most prestigious mixed-used precinct,” Attacq development head Giles Pendleton concluded.