Mars Multisales Africa, a division of global family-owned food company Mars, has recorded progress with its global Sustainable in a Generation plan, which was launched globally last year. The plan is designed to make tangible, scientifically-based changes to the way Mars does business globally. To achieve these changes, Mars will invest $1-billion over the next few years to accelerate progress against urgent threats to sustainability. Since the implementation of this plan, Mars has hit a number of key global milestones. Nearly 100% of coffee, palm oil and rice are now sourced sustainably, with notable strides in fish and cocoa sourcing on the near-term horizon. Mars has maintained its pledge of zero waste to landfill from direct operations and renewable energy will cover demand from direct operations in ten countries by the end of the year. Further, more than 93% of Mars’ manufacturing sites have been reached by a human rights due diligence programme, and 3 500 women in cocoa farming areas have been granted savings and loans programmes. “The results of the plan on a global level are astounding,” indicated Mars Multisales Africa GM Brian Ayling. “However, we’re also incredibly proud of the changes we have enacted locally that are making a huge difference for the lives of South Africans and for our local associates.” To reach sustainability goals, Mars Multisales Africa partnered with Mpact to implement what it calls a “revolutionary new modular packaging policy designed to cut costs, increase packing efficiency, reduce waste and reduce manufacturing emissions”. This policy has enabled Mars Multisales Africa to save over 355 t of paper and enough water to supply more than 235 households a year. Further, all local and regional manufacturing facilities are zero-waste-to-landfill sites. Beyond this, the company continues to find solutions to address water scarcity at its food manufacturing plant in Cape Town. When faced with the prospect of Day Zero owing to prolonged drought, the Cape Town plant implemented a system of boreholes, tanks and ozone and ultraviolet treatments designed to keep the plant sustainable and independent from the city’s water supply. The system was also able to generate enough fresh water to supply all of the local associates’ water needs as well, should Day Zero occur. “These actions are just the start of a strong commitment to sustainability,” concluded Ayling. “We are excited to do our part to substantially transform the world we live in to a more sustainable one within our lifetime.”