Environmental trade show Pollutec 2018, which will mark its fortieth anniversary this year, is set to cover 14 key industry sectors, and focus keenly on Africa – notably Burkina Faso – as well as other key regions, such as South America and South-East Asia. Pollutec has featured an Africa-focused area since 2016, with this serving as a meeting point for project holders from 22 countries across the continent. The trade show’s featured country for this year is Burkina Faso. This follows in the vein of 2014’s proceedings, when another French-speaking African country, Côte d’Ivoire, was honoured. Given Burkina Faso’s reliance on agriculture, adaption to climate change and the development of renewable energy are key focal points for the country, hence the choice to highlight it at this year’s event. Further, having experienced high growth levels in cities over the past two years, the West African country has had to contend with greater pollution, transport, health and other associated challenges, which the event also aims to tackle. These challenges lend themselves to parallels with other African cities, and industry professionals from the continent are expected to glean much insight and benefit from this event. Therefore, South African public and private stakeholders are encouraged to attend. Pollutec will be held at the Euroexpo in Lyon, France, from November 27 to 30. It is expected to attract about 2 200 exhibitors and 73 000 industry professionals from 128 countries. ENGENDERING ENVIRONMENTAL INNOVATION
Pollutec 2018 will include a 90 000 m2  hub dedicated to eco-innovation and clean, green technology. The event will bring together all environment and climate related sectors and their key international stakeholders, including manufacturing and tertiary activities. A range of innovative solutions will be presented at participating stands, at conference sessions and through several prizes that will be awarded. The Innovation Showcase is an initiative organised in conjunction with France’s PEXE network of eco-businesses, which will be awarded to the most promising technological or service solution in terms of market potential. The event will also host several innovation spots, providing a platform for start-ups from around the world, and for incubators from Burkina Faso and Kenya, to showcase their innovative solutions for companies across a variety of fields, including e-technology, mobility, green chemistry and the circular economy. Those participating in the innovation spots will be granted the option to present their solutions to market investors in a pitch ring setup. The pitch ring will also serve as the arena for “battles” between economic players and political-decision makers, on subjects that will be predetermined prior to the event by exhibition visitors. Further, as an incubator, the events assists with the emergence of sectors such as on-site sewerage systems, biogas, trenchless solutions and ecological engineering. This year’s edition will cover 14 broad sectoral themes, to facilitate the development of interdisciplinary and integrated solutions, including sustainable cities, sustainable industries (infrastructure, networks and connection) and sustainable markets. These themes will be geared towards specific needs and expectations – from coastlines and the sea, to hospitals, the tertiary/services sector and rural areas. These sectoral themes are water resource management; network management; collection, cleaning and cleansing;  waste treatment;  recycling,  reuse  and  materials;  sites  and  soils;  instrumentation,  metrology  and analysis; air, odour and noise management; risk prevention and management; energy production and storage; energy efficiency of products and processes; urban planning and mobility; biodiversity and natural environments; and pavilions and institutions (including support, training and research). Over the course of Pollutec’s 40-year history, the show has evolved from a pollution and water-treatment-equipment-dedicated show to an environmental showcase and industry incubator. Further to the circular economy solutions showcased during the innovation spots, Pollutec will feature several specific events designed to illustrate the transition to circular models of economic development in various industries, from end-of-life vehicles and waste electrical and electronic equipment such as old mobile mobiles, to construction site waste and end-of-life vessels. These will be accompanied by dismantling sessions. Pollutec’s organisers are also pursuing a pioneer international summit for cities and regions driving to the circular economy, in conjunction with Grand Lyon (the city of Lyon and its region), which is set to take place on November 28. For more information on attending Pollutec 2018, contact Stéfane Leny from Business France – The French Trade Commission on 011 303 7150/88.