Food and beverage company Nestlé South Africa and State-owned freight logistics group Transnet are among South Africa’s top employers, according to the Top Employer Institute, which, this week, held its Top Employer Awards ceremony, in Sandton. The Top Employer Institute Certification Programme assesses, besides other aspects, an organisation’s practices on talent strategy, workforce planning, learning and development, performance management and leadership development. According to the institute, creating a flexible work environment and driving a better employee experience are major factors that influenced Nestlé’s recognition as a top employer in South Africa. Nestlé South Africa was recognised as the number one top employer in the country, while Transnet has remained one of the top employers in the country for the third consecutive year. Nestlé South Africa also bagged the Top Employer in Industry for Fast Moving Consumer Goods and the Manufacturing Company Award category. Nestlé South Africa human resources director David Moloto said the recognition further affirmed the company’s efforts to attract some of the best talent in South Africa while making a contribution in addressing some of the socioeconomic challenges facing South Africa. “We are all aware of the challenges our country faces and the great opportunities it offers. At Nestlé, we are proud to play our part in the development of this great country. It is a role we have embraced for more than 100 years in South Africa, through our purpose, which is to enhance the quality of life and contribute to a healthier future.” Meanwhile, commenting on its certification as one of the country’s top employers, Transnet CE Siyabonga Gama said that “to be certified as [a] top employer for three consecutive years, simply tells how Transnet’s human resources policies are ranked among the best in the country and the continent”. He added that such certification would also promote Transnet as an aspirational brand and one of the most sought-after companies to work for.