Over and above appreciating the intrinsic value of water as a vital human resource, the South African approach should be to recognise the business value of the commodity and, therefore, the country should pursue investments in the sector to generate sustained economic growth, employment and general wellbeing. This was the key message outlined at the fourth Annual Water Stewardship Conference, jointly-hosted by GIZ, the International Water Stewardship Programme (IWaSP), the National Business Initiative (NBI), the Royal Danish Embassy (RDI) and the Strategic Water Partners Network (SWPN) South Africa, in Johannesburg, on Wednesday. The event built on the momentum of last year’s conference, which focused on closing the financing gap highlighted in the National Water and Sanitation Master Plan (NWSMP), and explored the related financial and economic benefits of investing in improved water resources and supply management as described in the NWSMP. Delegates were informed that since the prior year’s proceedings, the plan has been submitted to Cabinet and approved. The NWSMP sets out the prioritised action plan for water and sanitation in the country to 2030 and beyond. The plan pertains to meeting the water needs of the country; creating sustainable water infrastructure development; aims to create conditions that can create behavioural changes, perceptions, and attitudes towards water in the country; and strives to develop a water sector that allows the country to be resilient in the face of climate change. Such efforts are especially important in light of country’s current water crisis, which has already affected the country's economic performance. The water crisis was ascribed to insufficient water infrastructure maintenance and investment, droughts driven by climatic variation, inequalities in access to water and sanitation, deteriorating water utilities and a lack of skilled water engineers. This crisis affects the country’s economy in terms of revenue generation, cost of water treatment productivity losses, declining economic growth, health and hygiene, tourism and less access to water for productive uses. As a country plan, the NWSMP has been developed in conjunction with all the relevant partners, and brings together civil, public and private entities to collaborate in South Africa’s water space, which the conference aims to further facilitate. Representatives from each of the conference partners emphasised the importance of partnerships within the water sector, as well as engaging the research industry to develop the country’s water sector to become “world-class”.