The High Commission of India and the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) on Monday jointly launched a centre of specialisation at the Tshwane South technical and vocational education and training college to train electricians, boilermakers, mechanical fitters and millwrights, the High Commission said in a statement. The so-called “soft launch” of the Gandhi-Mandela Centre of Specialisation for Artisan Skills was attended by Higher Education and Training Minister Naledi Pandor and High Commissioner for India to South Africa and Lesotho Ruchira Kamboj. India will bear the cost of project planning and coordination; the supply, installation and commissioning of the machines and equipment; the sending of technical and training experts in the identified fields from India; the training of South African personnel in India; and on-the-job training of facilitators by Indian experts in South Africa as agreed between the two countries, the High Commission said. South Africa has provided infrastructure for the centre through the Training Institute at Tshwane, South Campus, Pretoria, and will provide all logistical support for the import of necessary equipment, materials and supplies for the project. Candidates enrolled at the centre will be issued with appropriate National Qualification Framework certificates by South African authorities upon completion of a course. After the completion and handing over of the project, its administration, running and maintenance shall be taken over by South Africa. The centre will be a multi-skills centre of specialisation and will promote quality vocational training in the identified sectors to meet the requirement of youth in South Africa, both unskilled and semi-skilled. “Affirming the importance of cooperation in the field of training and skills development, South Africa has welcomed the numerous opportunities offered by India and acknowledged the benefit that has accrued to their many students, looking forward to further strengthen the academic engagements between institutions on both sides,” the High Commission said on Monday. To this end, a memorandum of understanding had been signed between the governments of South Africa and India to set up the Gandhi-Mandela Centre of Specialisation for Artisan Skills in the presence of President Cyril Ramaphosa and Prime Minister Narendra Modi in July. “The centre is, thus, the practical manifestation as envisioned by leaders of both countries to promote quality vocational education and training to meet the training requirements of young people, as well as the artisan skills requirements of South Africa,” the statement concluded.