State-owned domestic and regional airline SA Express announced on Tuesday that it had relaunched two more of its services, as part of its plan to, as soon as possible, re-establish its best-performing routes. The two routes concerned are the domestic Johannesburg-Hoedspruit (Mpumalanga province) service and the regional Johannesburg-Walvis Bay (Namibia) service. The Johannesburg-Walvis Bay service had been operating since September 24 and the Johannesburg-Hoedspruit route would recommence on October 11. This would bring the number of routes now being operated by the airline, since it was relaunched in August, to seven. “SA Express’ primary objective is to connect secondary destinations to main airport hubs and connect people to businesses and people to their loved ones and we’re determined not to make our passengers wait any longer than necessary,” affirmed airline interim CEO Siza Mzimela. “The latest additions to our travelling roster is therefore a clear indicator of our promise to optimise on our efficiency as a business while observing industry standards for safety, product quality and customer service.” SA Express was grounded by the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) in May, because an audit had “uncovered severe cases of non-compliance that pose serious safety risks”. Subsequently, SA Express was (in the airline’s words) subjected to a “stringent and rigorous process” to restore its standards to the levels required by the regulator. As a result, the SACAA reinstated the airline’s certification as an Aircraft Maintenance Organisation early in July. Subsequently, the regulator also reinstated SA Express’ Air Operator’s Certificate and re-issued Certificates of Airworthiness for the majority (if not, by now, all) of its fleet. “The SA Express Board of Directors, Executive Management Team and employees have worked very hard to ensure that the airline’s return to service is efficient and sustainable,” she said. “It is in this vein that the airline adopted the new route rationalisation model which includes meticulous analysis of the airline’s route network in order to fully return to service.”