The circular economy, robotics, artificial intelligence (AI) and space exploration were among the main topics that were showcased at this year’s Maker Faire Rome, which took place at the Rome Exhibition Centre in Rome, Italy, from October 12 to 15,  2018.

The largest European innovation event – promoted and organised by the Rome Chamber of Commerce – was visited by over 100 000 people over the three days of the exhibition and is considered the world's most important show on innovation.

Students, researchers, families, enthusiasts, entrepreneurs and professionals all had the opportunity to discover over 700 selected projects from 61 different countries spread across seven themed pavilions, which Maker Faire Rome curator Massimo Banzi believed was “an outstanding performance for a fair that focuses on the digital revolution and shows how the future is shaping itself, and how we are shaping our lives accordingly”. This changing future was imagined through the eyes and creativity of the youth, with about 25 universities and research centres and 55 high schools from all over Italy being selected to exhibit their projects. “Fostering a digital culture represents the first step in the growth of innovative start-ups, with education playing a crucial role in the process,” he said.

"Maker Faire Rome has become a worldwide point of reference for the innovation and development of a digital culture, and we are extremely proud of this. The city of Rome, too, has proven to be up to hosting such a large international fair, which shows a keen desire to look at the future with confidence,” said Rome Chamber of Commerce president Lorenzo Tagliavanti. It places the city of Rome firmly at the centre of the innovation debate and fosters the dissemination of a culture of innovation. Entrepreneurs also had the opportunity to develop their business network and share their knowledge with peers from all over Europe, an essential aspect to expanding their business. 

The exhibition covered a diverse range of industries from agricultural technology and ‘future food’, to sustainability and the circular economy, as well as the Internet of Things, robotics and AI, and even health and wellbeing.