Jaguar has successfully completed the long-distance journey between Johannesburg and Durban in its all-electric I-Pace, using the recently announced Powerway network to charge the vehicle. The pre-production Jaguar I-Pace, in South Africa for testing and homologation purposes, began its trip with a fully topped-up 90 kWh battery at the Jaguar Centurion dealership, in Gauteng. Roughly three hours later, after travelling almost 310 km of the N1 and N3 towards Durban, the 298 kW electric sports-utility vehicle (SUV) made a stop to recharge at the publicly available 60 kW Jaguar Powerway fast charger, installed at the Bergview rest stop complex, in Harrismith. The I-Pace’s battery was replenished to 100% capacity in just enough time for its driver to enjoy breakfast and a rest at the nearby selection of restaurants, says the vehicle manufacturer. The recharge was billed at roughly a quarter of the cost of a full tank of petrol or diesel for an SUV with similar power outputs. The I-Pace completed its intercity road trip 306 km later at the Durban Marina. Jaguar Land Rover South Africa (JLRSA) says the intention of the trip was to prove the practicality of an electric vehicle (EV), combined with the new Jaguar Powerway charging infrastructure announced earlier this month. “The Jaguar Powerway makes long journeys possible and practical in an EV. “The journey was designed to replicate a holiday seeker’s Durban road trip as closely as possible and national speed limits were adhered to at all times.” “With the introduction of the Jaguar Powerway, EVs such as the Jaguar I-Pace are no longer restricted to the confines of urban areas,” notes JLRSA MD Richard Gouverneur. “Long-distance journeys are now possible without using a single drop of petrol. EV recharging infrastructure in South Africa may still be in its infancy, but Jaguar’s R30-million [Powerway] investment has kickstarted the revolution and put us at the forefront of e-mobility.” The Jaguar Powerway recharging network, in partnership with GridCars, will feature 82 new public charging stations, accessible to all EVs and plug-in hybrids, in the country’s major hubs and along frequently travelled freeways between the country’s major city centres, including Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, East London and Bloemfontein. Charging locations will include 30 fast chargers placed at every Jaguar Land Rover dealership, 30 at various shopping centres nationwide and 22 along the N1, N2 and N3 motorways. The first phase will be completed by the end of November. By the time the Jaguar I-Pace becomes available in the first quarter of 2019, three additional public fast chargers will be erected at points along the N3 between Gauteng and Kwazulu-Natal.