Diversified woodfibre company Sappi on Friday launched its Sappi Verve brand, which the company intends to use to strengthen its leadership in the dissolving wood pulp (DWP) market. Sappi CEO Steve Binnie said the company’s products and service offering within the DWP market are “highly valued and [Sappi] remains an industry leader in this space”. Verve, he explained, gives recognition to this reputation and the value that Sappi offers this market. “Sappi Verve represents our commitment to the entire value chain from brand owners through to the cellulosic fibre producers and our commitment to producing a natural fibre sourced from sustainably managed forests. “As a responsible corporate citizen, it is a commitment to our ethos of sustainability within the context of people, planet and prosperity,” he commented. The majority of DWP is consumed in the viscose industry where pulp is converted through the value chain to yarn and, ultimately, textiles providing naturally soft, breathable fabrics that are smooth to the touch, hold colour well and drape beautifully, Binnie elaborated. Additionally, he noted that DWP cellulosic fibre is also used for a myriad of household, industrial and pharmaceutical applications including for tablets, personal hygiene, cellophane, washing sponges and more. In the past, DWP sold by Sappi was unbranded and industry generic names were used as product names. This did not reflect the specific benefits which have always differentiated Sappi’s DWP, Binnie pointed out. The new Sappi Verve brand creates a very specific identity within the DWP market, he said. “At Sappi we have always known there is something special to our DWP products. We have consistent, outstanding quality products, supported by dedicated customer service, all underpinned by a strong sustainability story. “As a fibre produced from natural and renewable resources, Verve provides the value chain with a sustainable choice, not only within the broader textile sphere, which includes cotton and polyester, but as a preferred sustainable choice within the DWP market,” Sappi marketing VP Bernhard Riegler commented. Committing to a brand such as Sappi Verve, he elaborated, means committing to the broader values it denotes, not only the product attributes but also the broader commitments and values that Sappi as the parent brand stands for. “Consumers are becoming more active in making the right choices to contribute toward a tomorrow that is better than today. Sustainability is becoming increasingly important within a brand promise. “Sustainability that uplifts people, builds communities, generates economic value and secures the environment,” he added, highlighting that Sappi Verve represents enthusiasm, life, vigour and energy. Sappi Verve, Binnie concluded, aligns with the company’s goals as a business, which include diversity, sustainability, commitment to growth and adding value for customers, communities and investors.