Construction on the R1.4-billion Umgeni Lifestyle and Deco Park is under way, with completion of Phase A expected this month and the grand opening set for November 1. This commercial concept is a first-of-its-kind for this region, presenting a safe landscaped zone with green spaces and walkways across 135 000 m² of centrally located land, which will become the final piece of the Umgeni precinct masterplan. “When you drive along the Springfield and Umgeni industrial areas, there is a significant amount of clutter with haphazard businesses competing against each other. The Umgeni Lifestyle and Deco Park is a unique concept that aims to formalise the vibrant node offering high-spec infrastructure, management association, a ‘green’ environment, and a comprehensive framework of complementary services, which allows it to stand out from the crowd. “We are proud to bring this exceptional opportunity to KwaZulu-Natal and pioneer a commercial property offering of international standards,” commented Eris Property Group development manager Stephen Lawson. He added that the company was looking forward to handing over the first site to Zebbies Lighting in November, followed by a second site handover to CTM in early 2019. “Businesses that offer anything from home improvement products and appliances, building supplies, furniture, flooring and blinds to outdoor lifestyle products, call centres, offices and motor vehicle dealerships will find this space beneficial. “This park will allow businesses to lease a facility designed in accordance with their specifications and will provide them with the much-needed space to house their showroom, office and distribution within one site,” explained Lawson. The development has easy access to the N2, N3 and M19 within the busy Springfield node; and is only 5 km from Central Durban, 10 km from the harbour and 25 km from King Shaka International Airport. “There is a trend forming globally where mixed-use buildings provide a range of functions comprising of showroom, office, distribution and lifestyle facilities. “The concept of the Umgeni Lifestyle and Deco Park has been inspired by this trend in which businesses will not only be provided with ample space, but it creates a safe lifestyle offering where employees or visitors don’t need to leave the vicinity, as they will be able to shop, eat as well as access the premises and avoiding traffic congestion,” said Lawson. The development’s completion is expected to add immense value to the Umgeni area and initiate the start of a new commercial property offering.